---
pmid: '12945155'
doi: ''
pmcid: ''
title: '[Visual analysis of EEG in children with a cavum of the septum pellucidum].'
authors:
- Kubik Alicja
- Kaciński Marek
- Pakszys Michaela
- Dolik-Michno Monika
journal: Przeglad lekarski
year: 2003
month: null
volume: 60 Suppl 1
issue: ''
pages: 10-4
is_oa: false
oa_status: unknown
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 0
mesh_terms:
- Adolescent
- Brain Diseases
- Child
- Child, Preschool
- Cysts
- Electroencephalography
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Septum Pellucidum
- Severity of Illness Index
- Tomography, X-Ray Computed
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- bioelectric
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
diseases_annotated:
- CSP
- brain dysgenesis
- cavum of the septum pellucidum
- cavum of the spectrum pellucidum
- neuropsychological impairment
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 0
icite_rcr: 0.0
icite_percentile: 0.0
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# [Visual analysis of EEG in children with a cavum of the septum pellucidum].

## Abstract

**HYPOTHESIS**: It is possible that bioelectric activity of the both brain hemispheres is changed in children with a cavum of the spectrum pellucidum (CSP), a marker of brain dysgenesis. It could be connected probably with neuropsychological impairment in children with CSP.

**MATERIAL**: Visual analysis of EEG was done in 41 children with CSP aged 2 months to 17 years and in 32 children without CSP aged 3 months to 17 years. It induced 8 EEG curve pairs from each child, that means 328 pairs in CSP and 256 pairs without CSP children.

**METHODS**: EEG pattern was analysed by two physicians with an electro-encephalography license and data are a mean value of both analysis. Analysed were 40 minute EEG patterns, registered by 16 channels MedtronicDantec EEG PL-270 Video Option Aparat.

**RESULTS**: Brain bioelectric activity was significantly more often immature and basic activity irregular in children with CSP than in the group without CSP. Asymmetry of frequency and amplitude and slow activity were also significantly more often observed in children with CSP. Abnormal graphoelements were also significantly more often disclosed in children with CSP.

**CONCLUSIONS**: Visual analysis disclosed significant differences of EEG pattern in children with and without CSP. For identification of EEG from patient with CSP the quantitative method of analysis is necessary.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
