---
pmid: '15947040'
doi: 10.1097/01.RVI.0000170858.46668.65
pmcid: ''
title: 'Image-guided tumor ablation: standardization of terminology and reporting
  criteria.'
authors:
- Goldberg S Nahum
- Grassi Clement J
- Cardella John F
- Charboneau J William
- Dodd Gerald D
- Dupuy Damian E
- Gervais Debra
- Gillams Alice R
- Kane Robert A
- Lee Fred T
- Livraghi Tito
- McGahan John
- Phillips David A
- Rhim Hyunchul
- Silverman Stuart G
journal: 'Journal of vascular and interventional radiology : JVIR'
year: 2005
month: 6
volume: '16'
issue: '6'
pages: 765-78
is_oa: true
oa_status: bronze
oa_url: http://www.jvir.org/article/S1051044307606812/pdf
cited_by_count: 310
mesh_terms:
- Catheter Ablation
- Hot Temperature
- Humans
- Lasers
- Neoplasms
- Research Design
- Terminology as Topic
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms: []
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- acetic acid
- ethanol
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Hepatocellular Carcinoma Treatment and Prognosis
diseases_annotated:
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 251
icite_rcr: 7.636268337838078
icite_percentile: 96.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.95
icite_enriched: true
---

# Image-guided tumor ablation: standardization of terminology and reporting criteria.

## Abstract

The field of interventional oncology with use of image-guided tumor ablation requires standardization of terminology and reporting criteria to facilitate effective communication of ideas and appropriate comparison between treatments that use different technologies, such as chemical (ethanol or acetic acid) ablation, and thermal therapies, such as radiofrequency (RF), laser, microwave, ultrasound, and cryoablation. This document provides a framework that will hopefully facilitate the clearest communication between investigators and will provide the greatest flexibility in comparison between the many new, exciting, and emerging technologies. An appropriate vehicle for reporting the various aspects of image-guided ablation therapy, including classification of therapies and procedure terms, appropriate descriptors of imaging guidance, and terminology to define imaging and pathologic findings, are outlined. Methods for standardizing the reporting of follow-up findings and complications and other important aspects that require attention when reporting clinical results are addressed. It is the group's intention that adherence to the recommendations will facilitate achievement of the group's main objective: improved precision and communication in this field that lead to more accurate comparison of technologies and results and, ultimately, to improved patient outcomes. The intent of this standardization of terminology is to provide an appropriate vehicle for reporting the various aspects of image-guided ablation therapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
