---
pmid: '18270876'
doi: 10.1080/13645700701803826
pmcid: ''
title: Tumor thermal ablation therapy using alkali metals as powerful self-heating
  seeds.
authors:
- Rao Wei
- Liu Jing
journal: 'Minimally invasive therapy & allied technologies : MITAT : official journal
  of the Society for Minimally Invasive Therapy'
year: 2008
month: null
volume: '17'
issue: '1'
pages: 43-9
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 23
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Cattle
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Hot Temperature
- Hyperthermia, Induced
- In Vitro Techniques
- Male
- Mammary Neoplasms, Experimental
- Metals, Alkali
- Neoplasms
- Rats
- Rats, Sprague-Dawley
- Sodium
- Swine
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms: []
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs:
- alkali metal
- alkali metals
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Thermal properties of materials
diseases_annotated:
- Mammary adenocarcinoma
- Tumor
- coagulation
- necrosis
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 11
icite_rcr: 0.2948298787602756
icite_percentile: 15.7
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Tumor thermal ablation therapy using alkali metals as powerful self-heating seeds.

## Abstract

The aim of this study is to demonstrate a new tumor thermal ablation therapy, which might lead to a highly economic, safe and efficient heating of target tissues. The alkali metals, usually seen as hazard mediums in daily life, were proposed for the first time as perfect self-heating seeds which can significantly raise the temperature of the tumor tissues. Owing to the tremendous heat released at only the target site during reaction between the metal and the intrinsically existing wet environment of the biological body, the tumor tissues can be efficiently ablated without causing thermal damage to the surrounding healthy tissues. Several conceptual experiments were performed to demonstrate the new thermal ablation principle. Mammary adenocarcinoma cells in culture were found to be quickly destroyed due to the thermal and chemical effects induced by the alkali metal. Further, a significant temperature increase by a magnitude of > 40 degrees C or even combustion has been found easily available at the target site; this temperature increase produces a sufficiently large coagulation and necrosis area within selected areas either for in vitro or in vivo tests. The unique merit of the present thermal ablation therapy is that its remaining reactant can be absorbed by the tissue itself without causing any damage. This study opens possibilities of using the alkali metals to thermally ablate the target tumor in future clinical applications.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
