---
pmid: '20340017'
doi: 10.1007/s00264-010-0994-8
pmcid: PMC3014486
title: Pulsed electromagnetic field therapy results in healing of full thickness articular
  cartilage defect.
authors:
- Boopalan P R J V C
- Arumugam Sabareeswaran
- Livingston Abel
- Mohanty Mira
- Chittaranjan Samuel
journal: International orthopaedics
year: 2011
month: 1
volume: '35'
issue: '1'
pages: 143-8
is_oa: true
oa_status: bronze
oa_url: https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s00264-010-0994-8.pdf
cited_by_count: 40
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Cartilage, Articular
- Collagen Type II
- Electromagnetic Fields
- Hyaline Cartilage
- Male
- Models, Animal
- Rabbits
- Treatment Outcome
- Wound Healing
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- frequency-therapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- H&E
- Maissons trichrome
- PEMF
- Safranin O
- calcium phosphate
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Tendon Structure and Treatment
diseases_annotated:
- PEMF
- abrasion chondroplasty
- articular cartilage defect
- cartilage
- osteochondral defect
- osteochondral defects
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 27
icite_rcr: 1.1762228907149324
icite_percentile: 56.2
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Pulsed electromagnetic field therapy results in healing of full thickness articular cartilage defect.

## Abstract

This study aimed to determine the efficacy of PEMF (pulsed electromagnetic field) treatment in experimental osteochondral defect healing in a rabbit model. The study was conducted on 12 New Zealand white rabbits. Six rabbits formed the study group and six rabbits the control group. The right knee joints of all 12 animals were exposed and a 3.5-mm diameter osteochondral defect was created in the trochlear groove. The defect was filled with calcium phosphate scaffold. Six animals from the study group were given PEMF of one hour duration once a day for six weeks with set parameters for frequency of 1 Hz, voltage 20 V, sine wave and current ±30 mA. At six weeks the animals were sacrificed and histological evaluation was done using H&E, Safranin O, Maissons trichrome staining and immunohistochemistry for type 2 collagen. The quality of the repair tissue was graded and compared between groups with the Wakitani histological grading scale and a statistical analysis was done. The total histological score was significantly better in the study group (p = 0.002) with regeneration similar to adjacent normal hyaline cartilage. Immunohistochemistry for collagen type II was positive in the study group. PEMF stimulation of osteochondral defects with calcium phosphate scaffold is effective in hyaline cartilage formation. PEMF is a non-invasive and cost effective adjuvant treatment with salvage procedures such as abrasion chondroplasty and subchondral drilling.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
