---
pmid: '22864181'
doi: 10.1088/0031-9155/57/17/5425
pmcid: ''
title: 'Treatment planning of electroporation-based medical interventions: electrochemotherapy,
  gene electrotransfer and irreversible electroporation.'
authors:
- Zupanic Anze
- Kos Bor
- Miklavcic Damijan
journal: Physics in medicine and biology
year: 2012
month: 9
volume: '57'
issue: '17'
pages: 5425-40
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 122
mesh_terms:
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- Electrochemotherapy
- Electrodes
- Gene Transfer Techniques
- Genetic Therapy
- Humans
- Models, Biological
- Neoplasms
- Therapy, Computer-Assisted
- Vaccination
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- electrochemical-therapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Microbial Inactivation Methods
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- electroporation
- tumour
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 81
icite_rcr: 3.196377234857282
icite_percentile: 86.2
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Treatment planning of electroporation-based medical interventions: electrochemotherapy, gene electrotransfer and irreversible electroporation.

## Abstract

In recent years, cancer electrochemotherapy (ECT), gene electrotransfer for gene therapy and DNA vaccination (GET) and tissue ablation with irreversible electroporation (IRE) have all entered clinical practice. We present a method for a personalized treatment planning procedure for ECT, GET and IRE, based on medical image analysis, numerical modelling of electroporation and optimization with the genetic algorithm, and several visualization tools for treatment plan assessment. Each treatment plan provides the attending physician with optimal positions of electrodes in the body and electric pulse parameters for optimal electroporation of the target tissues. For the studied case of a deep-seated tumour, the optimal treatment plans for ECT and IRE require at least two electrodes to be inserted into the target tissue, thus lowering the necessary voltage for electroporation and limiting damage to the surrounding healthy tissue. In GET, it is necessary to place the electrodes outside the target tissue to prevent damage to target cells intended to express the transfected genes. The presented treatment planning procedure is a valuable tool for clinical and experimental use and evaluation of electroporation-based treatments.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
