---
pmid: '23132802'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.12-10248
pmcid: ''
title: Short-term effects of extremely low frequency pulsed electromagnetic field
  on corneas with alkaline burns in rabbits.
authors:
- Rezaei Kanavi Mozhgan
- Sahebjam Farzin
- Tabeie Faraj
- Davari Paniz
- Samadian Aminpasha
- Yaseri Mehdi
journal: Investigative ophthalmology & visual science
year: 2012
month: 11
volume: '53'
issue: '12'
pages: 7881-8
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 9
mesh_terms:
- Alkalies
- Animals
- Burns, Chemical
- Cornea
- Corneal Injuries
- Disease Models, Animal
- Electromagnetic Fields
- Eye Burns
- Female
- Rabbits
- Radiation Dosage
- Treatment Outcome
- Wound Healing
pub_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- frequency-therapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- ELF
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Corneal Surgery and Treatments
diseases_annotated:
- Descemetocele
- PEMF
- alkaline burns
- corneal defect
- corneal neovascularization
- corneal perforation
- limbal ischemia
- symblepharon
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 7
icite_rcr: 0.22017789051136863
icite_percentile: 11.4
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Short-term effects of extremely low frequency pulsed electromagnetic field on corneas with alkaline burns in rabbits.

## Abstract

**PURPOSE**: To investigate the short-term effects of extremely low frequency pulsed electromagnetic fields (ELF-PEMF) on the healing of alkaline-burned corneas in rabbits.

**METHODS**: Fifty-six alkaline-burned corneas from 56 rabbits were categorized into four groups: ELF-PEMF therapy with 2 mTesla (mT) intensity (ELF 2) for 30 minutes twice daily, ELF-PEMF therapy with 5 mT intensity (ELF 5) for 30 minutes twice daily, medical therapy (MT), and controls. Clinical examination together with digital photography of the corneas was performed on days 0, 2, 7, and 14. After euthanizing the rabbits, affected eyes were evaluated by way of histopathology. Finally the clinical and the histopathologic results of the four groups were compared.

**RESULTS**: None of the cases developed limbal ischemia, symblepharon formation, Descemetocele, or corneal perforation. Although the area of corneal defect in the ELF groups on day 2 was significantly less than the defects in MT, it was not notably different from those on days 7 and 14. Rate of significant corneal neovascularization on days 7 and 14 was not statistically different between the groups. The keratocyte loss in MT was significantly higher than in the ELF groups. Mild stromal scar formation was observed more frequently in ELF-PEMF groups than the control.

**CONCLUSIONS**: Short-term ELF-PEMF therapy is a safe, noninvasive, and markedly effective method in healing alkaline-burned corneas, and its therapeutic results are comparable with those of MT.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
