---
pmid: '24605025'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i9.2255
pmcid: PMC3942831
title: 'Management of borderline and locally advanced pancreatic cancer: where do
  we stand?'
authors:
- He Jin
- Page Andrew J
- Weiss Matthew
- Wolfgang Christopher L
- Herman Joseph M
- Pawlik Timothy M
journal: World journal of gastroenterology
year: 2014
month: 3
volume: '20'
issue: '9'
pages: 2255-66
is_oa: true
oa_status: bronze
oa_url: https://www.wjgnet.com/1007-9327/full/v20/i9/2255.htm
cited_by_count: 81
mesh_terms:
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols
- Chemoradiotherapy, Adjuvant
- Chemotherapy, Adjuvant
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Neoadjuvant Therapy
- Neoplasm, Residual
- Pancreatectomy
- Pancreatic Neoplasms
- Tomography, X-Ray Computed
- Treatment Outcome
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms: []
cancer_types:
- pancreatic
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Pancreatic and Hepatic Oncology Research
diseases_annotated:
- LAPC
- advanced
- pancreas cancer
- pancreatic cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 57
icite_rcr: 2.0245244198268573
icite_percentile: 74.8
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Management of borderline and locally advanced pancreatic cancer: where do we stand?

## Abstract

Many patients with pancreas cancer present with locally advanced pancreatic cancer (LAPC). The principle tools used for diagnosis and staging of LAPC include endoscopic ultrasound, axial imaging with computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging, and diagnostic laparoscopy. The definition of resectability has historically been vague, as there is considerable debate and controversy as to the definition of LAPC. For the patient with LAPC, there is some level of involvement of the surrounding vascular structures, which include the superior mesenteric artery, celiac axis, hepatic artery, superior mesenteric vein, or portal vein. When feasible, most surgeons would recommend possible surgical resection for patients with borderline LAPC, with the goal of an R0 resection. For initially unresectable LAPC, neoadjuvant should be strongly considered. Specifically, these patients should be offered neoadjuvant therapy, and the tumor should be assessed for possible response and eventual resection. The efficacy of neoadjuvant therapy with this approach as a bridge to potential curative resection is broad, ranging from 3%-79%. The different modalities of neoadjuvant therapy include single or multi-agent chemotherapy combined with radiation, chemotherapy alone, and chemotherapy followed by chemotherapy with radiation. This review focuses on patients with LAPC and addresses recent advances and controversies in the field.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
