---
pmid: '26883559'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2015.11.042
pmcid: ''
title: Improving Tumor Treating Fields Treatment Efficacy in Patients With Glioblastoma
  Using Personalized Array Layouts.
authors:
- Wenger Cornelia
- Salvador Ricardo
- Basser Peter J
- Miranda Pedro C
journal: International journal of radiation oncology, biology, physics
year: 2016
month: 4
volume: '94'
issue: '5'
pages: 1137-43
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 72
mesh_terms:
- Anisotropy
- Brain Neoplasms
- Electric Stimulation Therapy
- Electromagnetic Fields
- Glioblastoma
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Models, Anatomic
- Precision Medicine
- Transducers
- Treatment Outcome
- Tumor Burden
pub_types:
- Evaluation Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Intramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- ttfields
cancer_types:
- glioblastoma
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Advanced MRI Techniques and Applications
diseases_annotated:
- GBM
- Glioblastoma
- Tumor
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 47
icite_rcr: 1.8386040497336547
icite_percentile: 71.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Improving Tumor Treating Fields Treatment Efficacy in Patients With Glioblastoma Using Personalized Array Layouts.

## Abstract

**PURPOSE**: To investigate tumors of different size, shape, and location and the effect of varying transducer layouts on Tumor Treating Fields (TTFields) distribution in an anisotropic model.

**METHODS AND MATERIALS**: A realistic human head model was generated from MR images of 1 healthy subject. Four different virtual tumors were placed at separate locations. The transducer arrays were modeled to mimic the TTFields-delivering commercial device. For each tumor location, varying array layouts were tested. The finite element method was used to calculate the electric field distribution, taking into account tissue heterogeneity and anisotropy.

**RESULTS**: In all tumors, the average electric field induced by either of the 2 perpendicular array layouts exceeded the 1-V/cm therapeutic threshold value for TTFields effectiveness. Field strength within a tumor did not correlate with its size and shape but was higher in more superficial tumors. Additionally, it always increased when the array was adapted to the tumor's location. Compared with a default layout, the largest increase in field strength was 184%, and the highest average field strength induced in a tumor was 2.21 V/cm.

**CONCLUSIONS**: These results suggest that adapting array layouts to specific tumor locations can significantly increase field strength within the tumor. Our findings support the idea of personalized treatment planning to increase TTFields efficacy for patients with GBM.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
