---
pmid: '27052640'
doi: 10.1080/14656566.2016.1176146
pmcid: ''
title: Pharmacotherapies for the treatment of glioblastoma - current evidence and
  perspectives.
authors:
- Seystahl Katharina
- Gramatzki Dorothee
- Roth Patrick
- Weller Michael
journal: Expert opinion on pharmacotherapy
year: 2016
month: 6
volume: '17'
issue: '9'
pages: 1259-70
is_oa: true
oa_status: green
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 28
mesh_terms:
- Bevacizumab
- Brain Neoplasms
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Dacarbazine
- Glioblastoma
- Humans
- Neovascularization, Pathologic
- Snake Venoms
- Temozolomide
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- ttfields
cancer_types:
- glioblastoma
evidence_level: phase3-clinical
genes:
- EGFR
- epidermal growth factor receptor
drugs:
- bevacizumab
- cediranib
- enzastaurin
- temozolomide
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Glioma Diagnosis and Treatment
diseases_annotated:
- Glioblastoma
- brain tumor
- glioblastoma
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 21
icite_rcr: 0.7756478869942044
icite_percentile: 41.1
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Pharmacotherapies for the treatment of glioblastoma - current evidence and perspectives.

## Abstract

**INTRODUCTION**: Glioblastoma, the most common malignant brain tumor, exhibits a poor prognosis with little therapeutic progress in the last decade. Novel treatment strategies beyond the established standard of care with temozolomide-based radiotherapy are urgently needed.

**AREAS COVERED**: We reviewed the literature on glioblastoma with a focus on phase III trials for pharmacotherapies and/or innovative concepts until December 2015.

**EXPERT OPINION**: In the last decade, phase III trials on novel compounds largely failed to introduce efficacious pharmacotherapies beyond temozolomide in glioblastoma. So far, inhibition of angiogenesis by compounds such as bevacizumab, cediranib, enzastaurin or cilengitide as well as alternative dosing schedules of temozolomide did not prolong survival, neither at primary diagnosis nor at recurrent disease. Promising strategies of pharmacotherapy currently under evaluation represent targeting epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) with biomarker-stratified patient populations and immunotherapeutic concepts including checkpoint inhibition and vaccination. The clinical role of the medical device delivering 'tumor-treating fields' in newly diagnosed glioblastoma which prolonged overall survival in a phase III study has remained controversial. After failure of several phase III trials with previously promising agents, improvement of concepts and novel compounds are urgently needed to expand the still limited therapeutic options for the treatment of glioblastoma.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
