---
pmid: '27693317'
doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2016.09.024
pmcid: ''
title: Andrographolide reversed 5-FU resistance in human colorectal cancer by elevating
  BAX expression.
authors:
- Wang Weicheng
- Guo Wenjie
- Li Lele
- Fu Zan
- Liu Wen
- Gao Jian
- Shu Yongqian
- Xu Qiang
- Sun Yang
- Gu Yanhong
journal: Biochemical pharmacology
year: 2016
month: 12
volume: '121'
issue: ''
pages: 8-17
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 90
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols
- Apoptosis
- Cell Survival
- Colorectal Neoplasms
- Diterpenes
- Drug Resistance, Neoplasm
- Fluorouracil
- HCT116 Cells
- Humans
- Membrane Potential, Mitochondrial
- Mice, Nude
- Up-Regulation
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
- bcl-2-Associated X Protein
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- bioelectric
cancer_types:
- colorectal
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes:
- BAX
drugs:
- 5-FU
- Andrographolide
- biotin
- diterpenoid
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Andrographolide Research and Applications
diseases_annotated:
- colorectal cancer
- cytotoxicity
- inflammation
- toxicity
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 72
icite_rcr: 2.6285139748360526
icite_percentile: 81.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Andrographolide reversed 5-FU resistance in human colorectal cancer by elevating BAX expression.

## Abstract

5-FU is the first line therapy for colorectal cancer, however, treatment effect is often hampered by the development of drug resistance or toxicity at high doses. Andrographolide is a natural diterpenoid from Andrographis paniculata which has anti-bacterial, anti-antiviral and anti-inflammation activities. In the current study, we test the hypothesis that Andrographolide reverses 5-FU resistance in colorectal cancer and examine the underlying mechanism. In vitro and vivo studies indicated that Andrographolide treatment significantly re-sensitizes HCT116/5-FUR cells (HCT116 cells which are 5-FU resistant) to cytotoxicity of 5-FU. Mechanism analysis showed that Andrographolide/5-FU co-treatment elevated apoptosis level of HCT116/5-FUR cells with highly increased level of BAX. By using biotin-Andrographolide pull down and cellular thermal shift assay, we found out that Andrographolide can directly target to BAX. Andrographolide-BAX interaction prevented BAX degradation, enhancing mitochondria-mediated apoptosis thus reversed 5-FU resistance while BAX silence diminished this effect. Further, by analyzing patient samples who received 5-FU involved chemotherapy, we found that expression level of BAX is correlated with PFS. Our results here provide a novel combination treatment strategy, especially for patients with 5-FU-resistant tumors expressing low level of BAX. Meanwhile, we also proposed that BAX expression may be a predicted and prognosis marker of 5-FU involved chemotherapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
