---
pmid: '29469082'
doi: 10.4103/ijc.IJC_497_17
pmcid: ''
title: Novel use of bioelectric impedence technique to detect alterations in body
  composition in advanced small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Mohan A
- Poulose R
- Ansari A
- Madan K
- Hadda V
- Khilnani G C
- Guleria R
journal: Indian journal of cancer
year: 2017
month: null
volume: '54'
issue: '2'
pages: 478-480
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 2
mesh_terms:
- Body Composition
- Electric Impedance
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Small Cell Lung Carcinoma
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- bioelectric
cancer_types:
- lung
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nutrition and Health in Aging
diseases_annotated:
- Malnutrition
- SCLC
- cancer cachexia
- lung cancer
- sarcopenia
- small cell lung cancer
- weight loss
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 1
icite_rcr: 0.041072267739606934
icite_percentile: 2.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Novel use of bioelectric impedence technique to detect alterations in body composition in advanced small cell lung cancer.

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND**: Malnutrition is frequent in lung cancer and is measured using various tools, including the novel bioelectric impedance technique for measuring body composition. However, the validation of this technique for assessing body composition in advanced small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is untested.

**METHODS**: Forty-one treatment naïve patients (all males) and an equal number of age- and sex-matched controls were evaluated by anthropometric measurements of skinfold thicknesses and body composition parameters such as body fat%, fat mass, fat-free mass (FFM), and total body water (TBW).

**RESULTS**: The mean (SD) age of the patient group was 55.7 (7.5) years, median pack-years was 20 (range, 0-80), and mean (SD) duration of symptoms was 152.6 (153.7) days. Median Karnofsky Performance Scale was 70 (range, 50-90). Majority of our patients (68.3%) were Stage IV followed by Stage III (31.7%). The percentage of patients with low, normal, and high body mass index (BMI) was 31.7%, 61%, and 7.3%, respectively. All components of body composition, i.e., body fat%, FFM, and TBW were significantly lower in patients compared to controls. However, the body composition in patients and controls with normal BMI was similar. The phenomenon of sarcopenia as a cause of cancer cachexia may explain these findings, whereas the combination of loss of body fat and lean body mass may lead to weight loss and reduced BMI.

**CONCLUSION**: Our results indicate that body composition is markedly altered in Indian patients with advanced SCLC. The impact of these parameters on clinically relevant outcomes needs further evaluation.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
