---
pmid: '29870466'
doi: 10.1097/RMR.0000000000000155
pmcid: ''
title: MR-Guided Prostate Interventions.
authors:
- Woodrum David A
- Gorny Krzysztof R
- Mynderse Lance A
journal: 'Topics in magnetic resonance imaging : TMRI'
year: 2018
month: 6
volume: '27'
issue: '3'
pages: 141-151
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 12
mesh_terms:
- Catheter Ablation
- High-Intensity Focused Ultrasound Ablation
- Humans
- Image-Guided Biopsy
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Interventional
- Male
- Prostate
- Prostatic Neoplasms
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- hifu
cancer_types:
- prostate
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Prostate Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment
diseases_annotated:
- Prostate cancer
- death
- noncutaneous cancer
- prostate cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 11
icite_rcr: 0.6404788756474241
icite_percentile: 34.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# MR-Guided Prostate Interventions.

## Abstract

Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed noncutaneous cancer and second leading cause of death in men. Many patients with clinically organ-confined prostate cancer undergo definitive treatment of the whole gland, including radical prostatectomy, radiation therapy, and cryosurgery. Active surveillance is a growing alternative option for patients with documented low-volume and low-grade prostate cancer. However, many patients are wanting a less morbid focal treatment alternative. With recent advances in software and hardware of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), multiparametric MRI of the prostate has been shown to improve the accuracy in detecting and characterizing clinically significant prostate cancer. Targeted biopsy is increasingly utilized to improve the yield of MR detected, clinically significant prostate cancer and to decrease in detection of indolent prostate cancer. MR-guided targeted biopsy techniques include cognitive MR fusion transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) biopsy, in-bore transrectal targeted biopsy using robotic transrectal device, and in-bore direct MR-guided transperineal biopsy with a software based transperineal grid template. In addition, advances in MR-compatible thermal ablation technology allow accurate focal or regional delivery of thermal ablative energy to the biopsy-proved, MRI-detected tumor. MR-guided ablative treatment options include cryoablation, laser ablation, and high-intensity focused ultrasound with real-time or near simultaneous monitoring of the ablation zone. We present a contemporary review of MR-guided techniques for prostatic interventions.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
