---
pmid: '30982153'
doi: 10.1007/s10147-019-01448-4
pmcid: ''
title: Cryosurgery for primary breast cancers, its biological impact, and clinical
  outcomes.
authors:
- Takada Masahiro
- Toi Masakazu
journal: International journal of clinical oncology
year: 2019
month: 6
volume: '24'
issue: '6'
pages: 608-613
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 30
mesh_terms:
- Breast Neoplasms
- Cryosurgery
- Female
- Humans
- Treatment Outcome
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- electrochemical-therapy
- frequency-therapy
- immunotherapy
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- inhibitors
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Microbial Inactivation Methods
diseases_annotated:
- benign breast tumors
- breast cancer
- breast cancers
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 16
icite_rcr: 0.938142327230633
icite_percentile: 47.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Cryosurgery for primary breast cancers, its biological impact, and clinical outcomes.

## Abstract

Recently, a number of new minimally invasive image-guided percutaneous ablation treatments, including cryoablation, radiofrequency ablation, microwave ablation, high-intensity focused ultrasound, laser ablation, and irreversible electroporation have been developed. Several studies have shown the feasibility and safety of these cryoablation therapies for the treatment of benign breast tumors and small invasive breast cancer. Although the complete response rate of cryoablation for breast cancer is reported to be relatively good, most studies enrolled a small number of patients, and so reliable conclusions could not be drawn. In this review, we introduce the mechanisms of action of cryoablation, and summarize the current literature on the efficacy and safety of cryoablation for breast cancer. Cryoablation also induces an immunomodulatory effect, which is an interesting topic of research in the era of immune checkpoint inhibitors. Cryoablation for primary tumor may enhance the treatment effect of immune checkpoint inhibitors in patients with breast cancer. Further investigations of this new therapeutic strategy are needed.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
