---
pmid: '31341104'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.127474
pmcid: PMC6675557
title: An effective cell-penetrating antibody delivery platform.
authors:
- Herrmann Andreas
- Nagao Toshikage
- Zhang Chunyan
- Lahtz Christoph
- Li Yi-Jia
- Yue Chanyu
- Mülfarth Ronja
- Yu Hua
journal: JCI insight
year: 2019
month: 7
volume: '4'
issue: '14'
pages: ''
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: http://insight.jci.org/articles/view/127474/files/pdf
cited_by_count: 30
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Antibodies, Monoclonal
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Cell Membrane Permeability
- Drug Delivery Systems
- Humans
- Immunoconjugates
- Melanoma
- Mice
- Oligodeoxyribonucleotides
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
mechanisms:
- bioelectric
cancer_types:
- melanoma
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes:
- Myc
- SRC
- interferon regulatory factor 4
drugs:
- oligonucleotides
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Monoclonal and Polyclonal Antibodies Research
diseases_annotated:
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 23
icite_rcr: 0.8465185308230824
icite_percentile: 44.2
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# An effective cell-penetrating antibody delivery platform.

## Abstract

Despite their well-recognized success in the clinic, antibodies generally do not penetrate cellular membranes to target intracellular molecules, many of which underlie incurable diseases. Here we show that covalently conjugating phosphorothioated DNA oligonucleotides to antibodies enabled their efficient cellular internalization. Antibody cell penetration was partially mediated by membrane potential alteration. Moreover, without an antigen to bind, intracellular levels of the modified antibodies underwent cellular clearance, which involved efflux and lysosomal degradation, enabling detection of intended intracellular molecules as tested in fibroblasts, tumor cells, and T cells. This target-dependent cellular retention of modified antibodies extended to in vivo studies. Both local and systemic administrations of low doses of modified antibodies effectively inhibited intracellular targets, such as transcription factors Myc, interferon regulatory factor 4, and tyrosine-protein kinase SRC, and expression of their downstream genes in tumors, resulting in tumor cell apoptosis and tumor growth inhibition. This simple modification enables the use of antibodies to detect and modulate intracellular molecules in both cultured living cells and in whole animals, forming the foundation for a new paradigm for antibody-based research, diagnostics, and therapeutics.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
