---
pmid: '31497341'
doi: ''
pmcid: PMC6726979
title: 'Trends in the treatment of advanced hepatocellular carcinoma: immune checkpoint
  blockade immunotherapy and related combination therapies.'
authors:
- Cheng Huijuan
- Sun Guodong
- Chen Hao
- Li Yu
- Han Zhijian
- Li Yangbing
- Zhang Peng
- Yang Luxi
- Li Yumin
journal: American journal of cancer research
year: 2019
month: null
volume: '9'
issue: '8'
pages: 1536-1545
is_oa: false
oa_status: unknown
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 0
mesh_terms: []
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types:
- liver
- melanoma
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- CTLA-4
- PD-L1
- tyrosine kinase
drugs:
- Nivolumab
- cabozantinib
- lenvatinib
- regorafenib
- sorafenib
- tremelimumab
date_added: '2026-03-28'
diseases_annotated:
- HCC
- Hepatocellular carcinoma
- hepatocellular carcinoma
- liver cancer
- melanoma
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 79
icite_rcr: 2.915482145515269
icite_percentile: 84.3
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Trends in the treatment of advanced hepatocellular carcinoma: immune checkpoint blockade immunotherapy and related combination therapies.

## Abstract

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common liver cancer with high morbidity and mortality worldwide. Systemic treatments with several multi-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), including sorafenib, lenvatinib, regorafenib and cabozantinib, have been widely utilized int the treatment of HCC. However, with tolerable adverse events and relative low survival time, neo or optimized therapies for advanced HCC are still urgently needed. New developed immune checkpoint inhibitors therapy have been first demonstrated effective in metastatic melanoma through against CTLA-4 or PD-1/PD-L1 to renew T cell effector function. Preclinical data indicated that interference with immune checkpoint molecules results in HCC growth suppression, suggesting it may bring hope to the HCC treatment. Several clinical trials applying monoclonal antibodies to immune checkpoint molecules demonstrated that immune checkpoint inhibitors are safe and enable durable antitumor activity in advanced HCC patients. Several published immunotherapy trials in HCC using Anti-CTLA-4 agents (tremelimumab) or anit-PD-1 agents (Nivolumab) have showed promising results, in which have similar response rate (15%-30%) and disease control rate with TKIs therapies. This article will review the on-going clinical trials associated with immune checkpoint molecules monotherapy or co, and then discuss the optimal scheme of immune checkpoint therapy for advanced HCC.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
