---
pmid: '31830561'
doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2019.12.010
pmcid: ''
title: 'ATP citrate lyase: A central metabolic enzyme in cancer.'
authors:
- Icard Philippe
- Wu Zherui
- Fournel Ludovic
- Coquerel Antoine
- Lincet Hubert
- Alifano Marco
journal: Cancer letters
year: 2020
month: 2
volume: '471'
issue: ''
pages: 125-134
is_oa: true
oa_status: bronze
oa_url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/am/pii/S0304383519306160?via%3Dihub
cited_by_count: 241
mesh_terms:
- ATP Citrate (pro-S)-Lyase
- Acetyl Coenzyme A
- Animals
- Humans
- Neoplasms
- Oxaloacetic Acid
- Structure-Activity Relationship
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- metabolic-targeting
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- ACLY
- AKT
- ATP citrate lyase
- PFK 1 and 2
- SREBP1
drugs:
- NADPH
- OAA
- acetyl-CoA
- aspartate
- bempedoic acid
- citrate
- glucose
- hydroxycitrate
- lipid
- polyamine
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer, Hypoxia, and Metabolism
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- cancers
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 175
icite_rcr: 7.567210615220859
icite_percentile: 96.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# ATP citrate lyase: A central metabolic enzyme in cancer.

## Abstract

ACLY links energy metabolism provided by catabolic pathways to biosynthesis. ACLY, which has been found to be overexpressed in many cancers, converts citrate into acetyl-CoA and OAA. The first of these molecules supports protein acetylation, in particular that of histone, and de novo lipid synthesis, and the last one sustains the production of aspartate (required for nucleotide and polyamine synthesis) and the regeneration of NADPH,H+(consumed in redox reaction and biosynthesis). ACLY transcription is promoted by SREBP1, its activity is stabilized by acetylation and promoted by AKT phosphorylation (stimulated by growth factors and glucose abundance). ACLY plays a pivotal role in cancer metabolism through the potential deprivation of cytosolic citrate, a process promoting glycolysis through the enhancement of the activities of PFK 1 and 2 with concomitant activation of oncogenic drivers such as PI3K/AKT which activate ACLY and the Warburg effect in a feed-back loop. Pending the development of specific inhibitors and tailored methods for identifying which specific metabolism is involved in the development of each tumor, ACLY could be targeted by inhibitors such as hydroxycitrate and bempedoic acid. The administration of citrate at high level mimics a strong inhibition of ACLY and could be tested to strengthen the effects of current therapies.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
