---
pmid: '32088362'
doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2020.02.009
pmcid: ''
title: Applications and strategies in nanodiagnosis and nanotherapy in lung cancer.
authors:
- Woodman Christopher
- Vundu Gugulethu
- George Alex
- Wilson Cornelia M
journal: Seminars in cancer biology
year: 2021
month: 2
volume: '69'
issue: ''
pages: 349-364
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 158
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Drug Delivery Systems
- Humans
- Lung Neoplasms
- Nanomedicine
- Nanoparticles
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Review
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types:
- lung
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- carbon nanotubes
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- Lung cancer
- cancer
- death
- infectious diseases
- lung cancer
- pain
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 102
icite_rcr: 6.4537097627122355
icite_percentile: 95.3
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Applications and strategies in nanodiagnosis and nanotherapy in lung cancer.

## Abstract

Lung cancer is the second most common cancer and the leading cause of death in both men and women in the world. Lung cancer is heterogeneous in nature and diagnosis is often at an advanced stage as it develops silently in the lung and is frequently associated with high mortality rates. Despite the advances made in understanding the biology of lung cancer, progress in early diagnosis, cancer therapy modalities and considering the mechanisms of drug resistance, the prognosis and outcome still remains low for many patients. Nanotechnology is one of the fastest growing areas of research that can solve many biological problems such as cancer. A growing number of therapies based on using nanoparticles (NPs) have successfully entered the clinic to treat pain, cancer, and infectious diseases. Recent progress in nanotechnology has been encouraging and directed to developing novel nanoparticles that can be one step ahead of the cancer reducing the possibility of multi-drug resistance. Nanomedicine using NPs is continuingly impacting cancer diagnosis and treatment. Chemotherapy is often associated with limited targeting to the tumor, side effects and low solubility that leads to insufficient drug reaching the tumor. Overcoming these drawbacks of chemotherapy by equipping NPs with theranostic capability which is leading to the development of novel strategies. This review provides a synopsis of current progress in theranostic applications for lung cancer diagnosis and therapy using NPs including liposome, polymeric NPs, quantum dots, gold NPs, dendrimers, carbon nanotubes and magnetic NPs.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
