---
pmid: '32439265'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejso.2020.04.042
pmcid: ''
title: 'Implementing a system-wide cancer prehabilitation programme: The journey of
  Greater Manchester''s ''Prehab4cancer''.'
authors:
- Moore John
- Merchant Zoe
- Rowlinson Kirsty
- McEwan Karen
- Evison Matthew
- Faulkner Gemma
- Sultan Javed
- McPhee Jamie S
- Steele James
journal: 'European journal of surgical oncology : the journal of the European Society
  of Surgical Oncology and the British Association of Surgical Oncology'
year: 2021
month: 3
volume: '47'
issue: 3 Pt A
pages: 524-532
is_oa: true
oa_status: bronze
oa_url: http://www.ejso.com/article/S0748798320304388/pdf
cited_by_count: 85
mesh_terms:
- Aged
- Clinical Protocols
- England
- Female
- Frail Elderly
- Humans
- Male
- Neoplasms
- Organizational Innovation
- Preoperative Care
- Preoperative Exercise
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer survivorship and care
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 52
icite_rcr: 4.547061976610714
icite_percentile: 91.8
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.95
icite_enriched: true
---

# Implementing a system-wide cancer prehabilitation programme: The journey of Greater Manchester's 'Prehab4cancer'.

## Abstract

Patients undergoing major cancer interventions such as major surgical resection, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and immunotherapy are prone to the adverse effects of their cancer, as well as to the side effects of the treatments designed to cure them. The Prehabilitation process supports cancer patients in preparing for the physiological challenges of their cancer treatments, whilst aiming to shorten recovery time, reduce peri-operative complications and improve compliance with non-surgical treatments. Prehabilitation will be most useful in older patients. Greater Manchester Integrated Care system is the first regional system in the UK to introduce delivery of system-wide, large scale physical activity supported multi-modal prehabilitation and recovery programme, Prehab4Cancer as a standard of care for cancer patients. It builds upon the successful implementation of Enhanced Recovery After Surgery + programme to improve surgical care in Greater Manchester. During this review we describe the journey to develop a system wide prehabilitation model for patients with cancer. Prehab4Cancer to date has focused on robust co-design, development, and implementation of an effective service model with attention paid to stakeholder engagement. This has led to receipt of high numbers of referrals from across Greater Manchester for the all the cancer groups involved. The successful implementation of the P4C pathway in GM presents a best practice model that might be adopted by other local and combined authority areas nationally.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
