---
pmid: '33961843'
doi: 10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2021.04.007
pmcid: ''
title: Bioelectrical approaches to cancer as a problem of the scaling of the cellular
  self.
authors:
- Levin Michael
journal: Progress in biophysics and molecular biology
year: 2021
month: 10
volume: '165'
issue: ''
pages: 102-113
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2021.04.007
cited_by_count: 84
mesh_terms:
- Electrophysiological Phenomena
- Humans
- Membrane Potentials
- Morphogenesis
- Neoplasms
- Signal Transduction
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- bioelectric
cancer_types:
- melanoma
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Planarian Biology and Electrostimulation
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- cancer
- metastatic melanoma
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 47
icite_rcr: 3.066735498645326
icite_percentile: 85.4
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Bioelectrical approaches to cancer as a problem of the scaling of the cellular self.

## Abstract

One lens with which to understand the complex phenomenon of cancer is that of developmental biology. Cancer is the inevitable consequence of a breakdown of the communication that enables individual cells to join into computational networks that work towards large-scale, morphogenetic goals instead of more primitive, unicellular objectives. This perspective suggests that cancer may be a physiological disorder, not necessarily due to problems with the genetically-specified protein hardware. One aspect of morphogenetic coordination is bioelectric signaling, and indeed an abnormal bioelectric signature non-invasively reveals the site of incipient tumors in amphibian models. Functionally, a disruption of resting potential states triggers metastatic melanoma phenotypes in embryos with no genetic defects or carcinogen exposure. Conversely, optogenetic or molecular-biological modulation of bioelectric states can override powerful oncogenic mutations and prevent or normalize tumors. The bioelectrically-mediated information flows that harness cells toward body-level anatomical outcomes represent a very attractive and tractable endogenous control system, which is being targeted by emerging approaches to cancer.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
