---
pmid: '34002828'
doi: 10.26355/eurrev_202105_25836
pmcid: ''
title: Electroporation-based treatments in minimally invasive percutaneous, laparoscopy
  and endoscopy procedures for treatment of deep-seated tumors.
authors:
- Granata V
- Fusco R
- D'Alessio V
- Giannini A
- Venanzio Setola S
- Belli A
- Palaia R
- Petrillo A
- Izzo F
journal: European review for medical and pharmacological sciences
year: 2021
month: 5
volume: '25'
issue: '9'
pages: 3536-3545
is_oa: false
oa_status: unknown
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 0
mesh_terms:
- Administration, Intravenous
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Bleomycin
- Cisplatin
- Electrochemotherapy
- Electrodes
- Electroporation
- Humans
- Laparoscopy
- Neoplasms
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- electrochemical-therapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- bleomycin
- cisplatin
date_added: '2026-03-28'
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- cancers
- cytotoxic
- muscular contractions
- pain
- tumor metastases
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 13
icite_rcr: 1.3259296659081201
icite_percentile: 60.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Electroporation-based treatments in minimally invasive percutaneous, laparoscopy and endoscopy procedures for treatment of deep-seated tumors.

## Abstract

Electroporation (EP) techniques, used alone (Irreversible Electroporation, IRE) or in combination with anti-cancer drugs (Electrochemotherapy, ECT), have been shown to be effective in the treatment of several types of cancers. The efficacy of ECT and IRE is well demonstrated for the treatment of non-superficial tumor metastases, and it depends on the applied electrical parameters. Particularly, ECT is an effective local therapy that uses electroporation to enhance the cytotoxic effect of bleomycin or cisplatin injected intravenously or intratumorally. Pre-clinical investigations to test alternative anti-cancer drugs, explore new combinations of treatment modalities, and evaluate different sets of pulse protocols for effective tissue electroporation, are ongoing. Further ECT developments include the treatment of deep-seated tumors with percutaneous, laparoscopy, and endoscopy approaches, with the aim of establishing a less invasive approach. ECT is highly effective in the treatment of tumors of any histology, in minimizing the damage of critical normal tissue or organs, and in reducing pain and muscular contractions. This work describes the new technological advances in the field of ECT treatment for deep-seated tumors.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
