---
pmid: '34119934'
doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2021.05.025
pmcid: ''
title: 'Multi-disciplinary approach for the management of non-metastatic non-small
  cell lung cancer in the Middle East and Africa: Expert panel recommendations.'
authors:
- Göker Erdem
- Altwairgi Abdullah
- Al-Omair Ameen
- Tfayli Arafat
- Black Edward
- Elsayed Hany
- Selek Ugur
- Koegelenberg Coenraad
journal: Lung cancer (Amsterdam, Netherlands)
year: 2021
month: 8
volume: '158'
issue: ''
pages: 60-73
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 9
mesh_terms:
- Africa
- Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung
- Humans
- Lung Neoplasms
- Middle East
- Oncologists
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Review
- Consensus Statement
mechanisms: []
cancer_types:
- lung
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Lung Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment
diseases_annotated:
- NSCLC
- non-small cell lung cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 9
icite_rcr: 0.5625600570496436
icite_percentile: 30.7
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Multi-disciplinary approach for the management of non-metastatic non-small cell lung cancer in the Middle East and Africa: Expert panel recommendations.

## Abstract

The Middle East and Africa (MEA) region, a large geographical area, lies at the confluence of Asian, Caucasian and African races and comprises of a population with several distinct ethnicities. The course of management of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) differs as per patients' performance status as well as stage of disease, requiring personalized therapy decisions. Although management of NSCLC has received a significant impetus in the form of molecularly targeted therapies and immune therapies in last few years, surgery remains gold standard for patients with early-stage disease. In case of unresectable disease, radiotherapy and chemotherapy are the primary management modalities. With newer therapies being approved for treatment of early stage disease, use of multi-disciplinary team (MDT) for comprehensive management of NSCLC is of prime importance. A group of experts with interest in thoracic oncology, deliberated and arrived at a consensus statement for the community oncologists treating patients with NSCLC in the MEA region. The deliberation was based on the review of the published evidence including literature and global and local guidelines, subject expertise of the participating panellists and experience in real-life management of patients with NSCLC. We present the proposed regional adaptations of international guidelines and recommends the MDT approach for management of NSCLC in MEA.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
