---
pmid: '34314800'
doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2021.07.038
pmcid: ''
title: Recent progress in stimuli-responsive nanosystems for inducing immunogenic
  cell death.
authors:
- Banstola Asmita
- Poudel Kishwor
- Kim Jong Oh
- Jeong Jee-Heon
- Yook Simmyung
journal: 'Journal of controlled release : official journal of the Controlled Release
  Society'
year: 2021
month: 9
volume: '337'
issue: ''
pages: 505-520
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 64
mesh_terms:
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Humans
- Immunogenic Cell Death
- Immunotherapy
- Neoplasms
- Tumor Microenvironment
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- nanoparticle
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- immunogenic
- proinflammatory
- toxicity
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 50
icite_rcr: 2.4789130839673694
icite_percentile: 80.4
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Recent progress in stimuli-responsive nanosystems for inducing immunogenic cell death.

## Abstract

Low immunogenicity and immunosuppressive tumor microenvironments are major hurdles in the application of cancer immunotherapy. To date, several immunogenic cell death (ICD) inducers have been reported to boost cancer immunotherapy by triggering ICD. ICD is characterized by the release of proinflammatory cytokines, danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) and tumor associated antigens which will generate anticancer immunity by triggering adaptive immune cells. However, application of ICD inducers is limited due to severe toxicity issues and inefficient localization in the tumor microenvironment. To circumvent these challenges, stimuli-responsive nanoparticles have been exploited for improving cancer immunotherapy by limiting its toxicity. The combination of stimuli-responsive nanoparticles with an ICD inducer serves as a promising strategy for increasing the clinical applications of ICD induction in cancer immunotherapy. Here, we outline recent advances in ICD mediated by stimuli-responsive nanoparticles that may be near-infrared (NIR)-responsive, pH-responsive, redox responsive, pH and enzyme responsive, or pH and redox responsive, and evaluate their significant potential for successful clinical translation in cancer immunotherapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
