---
pmid: '34529928'
doi: 10.1016/j.cels.2021.08.006
pmcid: ''
title: Comprehensive prediction of robust synthetic lethality between paralog pairs
  in cancer cell lines.
authors:
- De Kegel Barbara
- Quinn Niall
- Thompson Nicola A
- Adams David J
- Ryan Colm J
journal: Cell systems
year: 2021
month: 12
volume: '12'
issue: '12'
pages: 1144-1159.e6
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: http://www.cell.com/article/S240547122100329X/pdf
cited_by_count: 74
mesh_terms:
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Humans
- Machine Learning
- Neoplasms
- Synthetic Lethal Mutations
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- crispr
- synthetic-lethality
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invitro
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: CRISPR and Genetic Engineering
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 57
icite_rcr: 2.3876455380891386
icite_percentile: 79.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Comprehensive prediction of robust synthetic lethality between paralog pairs in cancer cell lines.

## Abstract

Pairs of paralogs may share common functionality and, hence, display synthetic lethal interactions. As the majority of human genes have an identifiable paralog, exploiting synthetic lethality between paralogs may be a broadly applicable approach for targeting gene loss in cancer. However, only a biased subset of human paralog pairs has been tested for synthetic lethality to date. Here, by analyzing genome-wide CRISPR screens and molecular profiles of over 700 cancer cell lines, we identify features predictive of synthetic lethality between paralogs, including shared protein-protein interactions and evolutionary conservation. We develop a machine-learning classifier based on these features to predict which paralog pairs are most likely to be synthetic lethal and to explain why. We show that our classifier accurately predicts the results of combinatorial CRISPR screens in cancer cell lines and furthermore can distinguish pairs that are synthetic lethal in multiple cell lines from those that are cell-line specific. A record of this paper's transparent peer review process is included in the supplemental information.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
