---
pmid: '34624752'
doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2021.121167
pmcid: ''
title: Cancer immunogenic cell death via photo-pyroptosis with light-sensitive Indoleamine
  2,3-dioxygenase inhibitor conjugate.
authors:
- Lu Yang
- Xu Feng
- Wang Yang
- Shi Chao
- Sha Yuzhuo
- He Guangli
- Yao Qichao
- Shao Kun
- Sun Wen
- Du Jianjun
- Fan Jiangli
- Peng Xiaojun
journal: Biomaterials
year: 2021
month: 11
volume: '278'
issue: ''
pages: '121167'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 126
mesh_terms:
- Enzyme Inhibitors
- Humans
- Immunogenic Cell Death
- Immunotherapy
- Indoleamine-Pyrrole 2,3,-Dioxygenase
- Neoplasms
- Phototherapy
- Pyroptosis
- Tumor Microenvironment
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- GSDMD
- IDO
- Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase
- gasdermin-D
drugs:
- NBS-1MT
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Inflammasome and immune disorders
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 87
icite_rcr: 4.241332204457879
icite_percentile: 90.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Cancer immunogenic cell death via photo-pyroptosis with light-sensitive Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase inhibitor conjugate.

## Abstract

Immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) therapy currently considered as to be effective way to cure cancer in clinic. However, the insufficient tumor immunogenicity and the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment always result in diminished efficacy of immunotherapy. Herein, we report the synthesis of an organic photo-immune activator NBS-1MT, the combination of photosensitizer and Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) inhibitor effectively stimulates lysosomes oxidative stress the releases inflammatory cytokines. This process triggers pyroptosis for the considerable immunogenic cell death (ICD) while reversing suppressive tumor microenvironment. The photo-immune drug shows outstanding potential to activate caspase-1and then remove gasdermin-D (GSDMD), which could stimulate pyroptosis and also inhibit the tumor growth successfully in both primary and distant tumor. Furthermore, pyroptosis activated by photodynamic therapy (PDT) promotes the immune related factors release, and enhance the intratumoral infiltration of cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) with the induction of ICD of tumor cells and the cascaded synergize with IDO inhibitor, so the general antitumor immune response could be strengthened effectively. Our research confirms that the use of NBS-1MT is a promising strategy to boost the immune response and eventually to inhibit tumor growth.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
