---
pmid: '34643196'
doi: 10.1039/d1nr05512g
pmcid: ''
title: Chemotherapeutic drug-induced immunogenic cell death for nanomedicine-based
  cancer chemo-immunotherapy.
authors:
- Jiang Mingxia
- Zeng Jun
- Zhao Liping
- Zhang Mogen
- Ma Jinlong
- Guan Xiuwen
- Zhang Weifen
journal: Nanoscale
year: 2021
month: 10
volume: '13'
issue: '41'
pages: 17218-17235
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 129
mesh_terms:
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Humans
- Immunogenic Cell Death
- Immunotherapy
- Nanomedicine
- Neoplasms
- Pharmaceutical Preparations
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- nanoparticle
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invitro
genes: []
drugs:
- CPA
- DOX
- OXA
- PTX
- cyclophosphamide
- doxorubicin
- oxaliplatin
- paclitaxel
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Immunotherapy and Immune Responses
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- malignant tumors
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 91
icite_rcr: 4.988474163548497
icite_percentile: 92.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Chemotherapeutic drug-induced immunogenic cell death for nanomedicine-based cancer chemo-immunotherapy.

## Abstract

Chemotherapy has been a conventional paradigm for cancer treatment, and multifarious chemotherapeutic drugs have been widely employed for decades with significant performances in suppressing tumors. Moreover, some of the antitumor chemotherapeutic agents, such as doxorubicin (DOX), oxaliplatin (OXA), cyclophosphamide (CPA) and paclitaxel (PTX), can also tackle tumors through the induction of immunogenic cell death (ICD) in tumor cells to trigger specific antitumor immune responses of the body and improve chemotherapy efficacy. In recent years, chemo-immunotherapy has attracted increasing attention as one of the most promising combination therapies to struggle with malignant tumors. Many effective antitumor therapies have benefited from the successful induction of ICD in tumors, which could incur the release of endogenous danger signals and tumor-associated antigens (TAAs), further stimulating antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and ultimately initiating efficient antitumor immunity. In this review, several well-characterized damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) were introduced and the progress of ICD induced by representative chemotherapeutic drugs for nanomedicine-based chemo-immunotherapy was highlighted. In addition, the combination strategies involving ICD cooperated with other therapies were discussed. Finally, we shared some perspectives in chemotherapeutic drug-induced ICD for future chemo-immunotherapy. It was hoped that this review would provide worthwhile presentations and enlightenments for cancer chemo-immunotherapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
