---
pmid: '34687357'
doi: 10.1007/s11864-021-00912-6
pmcid: ''
title: Role of Laser Interstitial Thermal Therapy in the Management of Primary and
  Metastatic Brain Tumors.
authors:
- Melnick Kaitlyn
- Shin David
- Dastmalchi Farhad
- Kabeer Zain
- Rahman Maryam
- Tran David
- Ghiaseddin Ashley
journal: Current treatment options in oncology
year: 2021
month: 10
volume: '22'
issue: '12'
pages: '108'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 33
mesh_terms:
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Blood-Brain Barrier
- Brain Neoplasms
- Chemotherapy, Adjuvant
- Glioblastoma
- Humans
- Laser Therapy
- Radiation Injuries
- Stereotaxic Techniques
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- ttfields
cancer_types:
- glioblastoma
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Brain Metastases and Treatment
diseases_annotated:
- Brain Tumors
- CNS tumors
- brain tumors
- cerebral edema
- glioblastoma
- hyperthermia
- metastases
- necrosis
- primary central nervous system (CNS) neoplasms
- radiation necrosis
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 27
icite_rcr: 1.8054365517732038
icite_percentile: 71.3
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Role of Laser Interstitial Thermal Therapy in the Management of Primary and Metastatic Brain Tumors.

## Abstract

Laser interstitial thermal therapy (LITT) is a minimally invasive treatment option for brain tumors including glioblastoma, other primary central nervous system (CNS) neoplasms, metastases, and radiation necrosis. LITT employs a fiber optic coupled laser delivery probe stabilized via stereotaxis to deliver thermal energy that induces coagulative necrosis in tumors to achieve effective cytoreduction. LITT complements surgical resection, radiation treatment, tumor treating fields, and systemic therapy, especially in patients who are high risk for surgical resection due to tumor location in eloquent regions or poor functional status. These factors must be balanced with the increased rate of cerebral edema post LITT compared to surgical resection. LITT has also been shown to induce transient disruption of the blood-brain barrier (BBB), especially in the peritumoral region, which allows for enhanced CNS delivery of anti-neoplastic agents, thus greatly expanding the armamentarium against brain tumors to include highly effective anti-neoplastic agents that have poor BBB penetration. In addition, hyperthermia-induced immunogenic cell death is another secondary side effect of LITT that opens up immunotherapy as an attractive adjuvant treatment for brain tumors. Numerous large studies have demonstrated the safety and efficacy of LITT against various CNS tumors and as the literature continues to grow on this novel technique so will its indications.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
