---
pmid: '35395355'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2022.03.030
pmcid: ''
title: Recent Advances in the Therapeutic Strategies of Glioblastoma Multiforme.
authors:
- Aldoghachi Asraa Faris
- Aldoghachi Ahmed Faris
- Breyne Koen
- Ling King-Hwa
- Cheah Pike-See
journal: Neuroscience
year: 2022
month: 5
volume: '491'
issue: ''
pages: 240-270
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 87
mesh_terms:
- Brain Neoplasms
- Glioblastoma
- Humans
- Immunotherapy
- Neoplastic Stem Cells
- Temozolomide
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- ttfields
cancer_types:
- glioblastoma
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- temozolomide
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Glioma Diagnosis and Treatment
diseases_annotated:
- GBM
- GBM cancer
- Glioblastoma Multiforme
- Glioblastoma multiforme
- astrocytoma
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 68
icite_rcr: 5.826058875732899
icite_percentile: 94.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Recent Advances in the Therapeutic Strategies of Glioblastoma Multiforme.

## Abstract

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is one of the most common, most formidable, and deadliest malignant types of primary astrocytoma with a poor prognosis. At present, the standard of care includes surgical tumor resection, followed by radiation therapy concomitant with chemotherapy and temozolomide. New developments and significant advances in the treatment of GBM have been achieved in recent decades. However, despite the advances, recurrence is often inevitable, and the survival of patients remains low. Various factors contribute to the difficulty in identifying an effective therapeutic option, among which are tumor complexity, the presence of the blood-brain barrier (BBB), and the presence of GBM cancer stem cells, prompting the need for improving existing treatment approaches and investigating new treatment alternatives for ameliorating the treatment strategies of GBM. In this review, we outline some of the most recent literature on the various available treatment options such as surgery, radiotherapy, cytotoxic chemotherapy, gene therapy, immunotherapy, phototherapy, nanotherapy, and tumor treating fields in the treatment of GBM, and we list some of the potential future directions of GBM. The reviewed studies confirm that GBM is a sophisticated disease with several challenges for scientists to address. Hence, more studies and a multimodal therapeutic approach are crucial to yield an effective cure and prolong the survival of GBM patients.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
