---
pmid: '35504200'
doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2022.108816
pmcid: ''
title: Identifying novel tumor-related antigens and immune phenotypes for developing
  mRNA vaccines in lung adenocarcinoma.
authors:
- Zhou Bolun
- Zang Ruochuan
- Zhang Moyan
- Song Peng
- Liu Lei
- Bie Fenglong
- Peng Yue
- Bai Guangyu
- Gao Shugeng
journal: International immunopharmacology
year: 2022
month: 8
volume: '109'
issue: ''
pages: '108816'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 7
mesh_terms:
- Adenocarcinoma of Lung
- Antigens, Neoplasm
- Biomarkers, Tumor
- Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic
- Humans
- Lung Neoplasms
- Phenotype
- Prognosis
- Vaccines, Synthetic
- mRNA Vaccines
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- mRNA-vaccine
cancer_types:
- lung
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- CCNB1
- KIAA0101
- OIP5
- PBK
- PLEK2
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Immunotherapy and Immune Responses
diseases_annotated:
- LUAD
- cancer
- cancers
- lung adenocarcinoma
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 7
icite_rcr: 0.34742713865533253
icite_percentile: 18.7
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Identifying novel tumor-related antigens and immune phenotypes for developing mRNA vaccines in lung adenocarcinoma.

## Abstract

The mRNA vaccines have been a novel strategy of immunotherapies for multiple cancers. Although several types of mRNA vaccines have been investigated and validated in some studies, their efficacy among patients with lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) remains largely unknown. The number of tumor-associated antigens is not enough and no study focuses on stratifying the subgroup of LUAD patients suitable for vaccination. Based on the expression profiles of immune-related genes, consensus clustering was performed to identify the most appropriate phenotype for vaccination. The immune landscape of LUAD was shown via the graph learning-based dimensionality reduction analysis. We screened for five mutated and upregulated LUAD-related antigens (CCNB1, KIAA0101, PBK, OIP5 and PLEK2) that were highly correlated with immune infiltrating cells and unfavorable clinical outcomes. And three distinct immune phenotypes were identified in the TCGA and GSE72094 cohorts. Group S1 was an immunological "hot" cluster and related to a better prognosis, whereas Group S2&S3 was an immunological "cold" cluster and associated with a poorer prognosis. At last, the results revealed heterogeneity of LUAD patients in the immune landscape. We identified five potential cancer-related antigens for mRNA vaccines, and Group S2&S3 were the most suitable phenotypes for vaccination.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
