---
pmid: '35793428'
doi: 10.1111/exd.14639
pmcid: ''
title: 'The gut microbiome and melanoma: A review.'
authors:
- Makaranka Stanislau
- Scutt Freya
- Frixou Mikaela
- Wensley Katherine E
- Sharma Ravi
- Greenhowe Jennifer
journal: Experimental dermatology
year: 2022
month: 9
volume: '31'
issue: '9'
pages: 1292-1301
is_oa: true
oa_status: bronze
oa_url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdfdirect/10.1111/exd.14639
cited_by_count: 36
mesh_terms:
- Carcinogenesis
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome
- Humans
- Immunotherapy
- Melanoma
- Microbiota
- Neoplasms
- Skin Neoplasms
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types:
- melanoma
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer Immunotherapy and Biomarkers
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- cancers
- carcinogenesis
- chronic inflammation
- malignant melanoma
- melanoma
- metastatic disease
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 31
icite_rcr: 2.221662581482253
icite_percentile: 77.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# The gut microbiome and melanoma: A review.

## Abstract

Disturbances in the microbial ecosystem have been implemented in chronic inflammation, immune evasion and carcinogenesis, with certain microbes associated with the development of specific cancers. In recent times, the gut microbiome has been recognised as a potential novel player in the pathogenesis and treatment of malignant melanoma. It has been shown that the composition of gut microbiota in early-stage melanoma changes from in situ to invasive and then to metastatic disease. The gut bacterial and fungal profile has also been found to be significantly different in melanoma patients compared to controls. Multiple studies of immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) therapies have shown that the commensal microbiota may have an impact on anti-tumor immunity and therefore ICI response in cancer patients. When it comes to chemotherapy and radiotherapy treatments, studies demonstrate that gut microbiota are invaluable in the repair of radiation and chemotherapy-induced damage and therapeutic manipulation of gut microbiota can be an effective strategy to deal with side effects. Studies demonstrate the oncogenic and tumor-suppressive properties of the gut microbiome, which may play a role in the pathogenesis of melanoma. Despite this, investigations into specific interactions are still in its infancy, but starting to gain momentum as more significant and clinically relevant effects are emerging.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
