---
pmid: '36056851'
doi: 10.2174/1566523222666220831161225
pmcid: ''
title: CRISPR/Cas9-based Gene Therapies for Fighting Drug Resistance Mediated by Cancer
  Stem Cells.
authors:
- Dashtaki Masoumeh Eliyasi
- Ghasemi Sorayya
journal: Current gene therapy
year: 2023
month: null
volume: '23'
issue: '1'
pages: 41-50
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 6
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- CRISPR-Cas Systems
- Gene Editing
- Genetic Therapy
- Neoplasms
- Neoplastic Stem Cells
pub_types:
- Review
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- crispr
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: CRISPR and Genetic Engineering
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- cancer
- cancers
- hematological cancers
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 4
icite_rcr: 0.5158189972443801
icite_percentile: 28.2
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# CRISPR/Cas9-based Gene Therapies for Fighting Drug Resistance Mediated by Cancer Stem Cells.

## Abstract

Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are cancer-initiating cells found in most tumors and hematological cancers. CSCs are involved in cells progression, recurrence of tumors, and drug resistance. Current therapies have been focused on treating the mass of tumor cells and cannot eradicate the CSCs. CSCs drug-specific targeting is considered as an approach to precisely target these cells. Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR/Cas9) gene-editing systems are making progress and showing promise in the cancer research field. One of the attractive applications of CRISPR/Cas9 as one approach of gene therapy is targeting the critical genes involved in drug resistance and maintenance of CSCs. The synergistic effects of gene editing as a novel gene therapy approach and traditional therapeutic methods, including chemotherapy, can resolve drug resistance challenges and regression of the cancers. This review article considers different aspects of CRISPR/Cas9 ability in the study and targeting of CSCs with the intention to investigate their application in drug resistance.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
