---
pmid: '36053771'
doi: 10.1002/jcph.2137
pmcid: PMC10087001
title: Population Pharmacokinetics of Patritumab Deruxtecan in Patients With Solid
  Tumors.
authors:
- Lu Yasong
- Shimizu Shinji
- Sawamura Ryoko
- Tajima Naoyuki
- He Ling
- Lee Mark
- Abutarif Malaz
- Shi Rong
journal: Journal of clinical pharmacology
year: 2023
month: 1
volume: '63'
issue: '1'
pages: 77-90
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1002/jcph.2137
cited_by_count: 8
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized
- Camptothecin
- Immunoconjugates
- Neoplasms
- Trastuzumab
- Erb-b2 Receptor Tyrosine Kinases
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- antibody-drug-conjugate
cancer_types:
- colorectal
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- HER3
- albumin
- epidermal growth factor receptor 3
drugs:
- DXd
- MAAA-1181a
- Patritumab Deruxtecan
- Patritumab deruxtecan
- deruxtecan
- patritumab deruxtecan
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: HER2/EGFR in Cancer Research
diseases_annotated:
- Solid Tumors
- breast, lung, and colorectal cancer
- solid tumors
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 6
icite_rcr: 0.5581404345669951
icite_percentile: 30.4
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Population Pharmacokinetics of Patritumab Deruxtecan in Patients With Solid Tumors.

## Abstract

Patritumab deruxtecan is an antibody-drug conjugate consisting of a fully human monoclonal antibody against human epidermal growth factor receptor 3 (HER3) attached to a topoisomerase I inhibitor payload via a tetrapeptide-based cleavable linker. As part of the pharmacometric analysis informing dose selection for later-stage development, population pharmacokinetics (PK) analysis of patritumab deruxtecan was conducted with pooled serum PK data from patients with HER3-expressing solid tumors (from 3 phase 1/2 studies in breast, lung, and colorectal cancer; N = 425) treated over the dose range of 1.6 to 8.0 mg/kg intravenously every 3 weeks. Population PK modeling for deruxtecan (DXd)-conjugated antibody (representing patritumab deruxtecan) and unconjugated MAAA-1181a (DXd, payload) was carried out sequentially. DXd-conjugated antibody PK was described using a 2-compartment model with parallel linear and nonlinear clearance. Unconjugated DXd PK was described using a 1-compartment model with linear clearance and release of DXd as a first-order, time-dependent function of the level of DXd-conjugated antibody in the central compartment. Preliminary covariate evaluation was conducted for prespecified covariates of pharmacological plausibility and clinical interest. The final model retained weight (on linear clearance and central volume) and albumin level, sex, and tumor type (on linear clearance) for DXd-conjugated antibody, and weight (on release rate constant) and hepatic function (on clearance) for unconjugated DXd. Effects of these covariates on the exposure metrics were generally mild and did not require dose adjustment for subpopulations in subsequent development. Further PK characterization for patritumab deruxtecan will evolve with emerging data.

## Full Text

Population Pharmacokinetics of Patritumab Deruxtecan in Patients With Solid Tumors

Abstract

Patritumab deruxtecan is an antibody–drug conjugate consisting of a fully human monoclonal antibody against human epidermal growth factor receptor 3 (HER3) attached to a topoisomerase I inhibitor payload via a tetrapeptide‐based cleavable linker. As part of the pharmacometric analysis informing dose selection for later‐stage development, population pharmacokinetics (PK) analysis of patritumab deruxtecan was conducted with pooled serum PK data from patients with HER3‐expressing solid tumors (from 3 phase 1/2 studies in breast, lung, and colorectal cancer; N = 425) treated over the dose range of 1.6 to 8.0 mg/kg intravenously every 3 weeks. Population PK modeling for deruxtecan (DXd)‐conjugated antibody (representing patritumab deruxtecan) and unconjugated MAAA‐1181a (DXd, payload) was carried out sequentially. DXd‐conjugated antibody PK was described using a 2‐compartment model with parallel linear and nonlinear clearance. Unconjugated DXd PK was described using a 1‐compartment model with linear clearance and release of DXd as a first‐order, time‐dependent function of the level of DXd‐conjugated antibody in the central compartment. Preliminary covariate evaluation was conducted for prespecified covariates of pharmacological plausibility and clinical interest. The final model retained weight (on linear clearance and central volume) and albumin level, sex, and tumor type (on linear clearance) for DXd‐conjugated antibody, and weight (on release rate constant) and hepatic function (on clearance) for unconjugated DXd. Effects of these covariates on the exposure metrics were generally mild and did not require dose adjustment for subpopulations in subsequent development. Further PK characterization for patritumab deruxtecan will evolve with emerging data.

In 2020, cancers of the breast, lung, and colorectum had the highest incidences globally, accounting for 33% of new cancer cases, and were responsible for 34% of deaths from cancer. More treatment options are needed for patients who have a poor prognosis with current therapies, such as patients with triple‐negative breast cancer, treatment‐refractory hormone receptor‐positive (HR+)/human epidermal growth factor receptor 2‐negative (HER2–) metastatic breast cancer (including those with visceral metastases), metastatic non‐small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and metastatic colorectal cancer. Overexpression of HER3, which is frequently expressed in solid tumors, has been associated with worsened clinical outcomes. However, no drugs based on the inhibition of HER3 have yet been approved. Therefore, this membrane protein provides an attractive molecular target for an antibody–drug conjugate (ADC) antitumor therapy. 

Patritumab deruxtecan is an ADC consisting of a fully human anti‐HER3 immunoglobulin G1 monoclonal antibody (patritumab) covalently linked to a topoisomerase I inhibitor payload (MAAA‐1181a, a derivative of exatecan; henceforth referred to as DXd) via a tetrapeptide‐based cleavable linker, with a drug‐to‐antibody ratio of approximately 8. Following trafficking to the lysosome, the linker is cleaved by lysosomal enzymes that are typically upregulated in tumor cells, which allows the released cytotoxic payload (DXd) to enter the nucleus, leading to cell death via induced DNA damage. The payload is cell membrane permeable, which enables a bystander antitumor effect resulting in the elimination of both target and surrounding tumor cells. In ongoing phase 1/2 studies, patritumab deruxtecan showed promising antitumor activity, with an acceptable and manageable safety profile, in heavily pretreated patients with HR+/HER2– metastatic breast cancer and EGFR‐mutated NSCLC. 

Pharmacometric analyses, including population pharmacokinetics (PK) modeling and exposure–response analyses, have been used to guide dose optimization during the ongoing clinical development of patritumab deruxtecan for the treatment of solid tumors. The latest round of analysis was based on the currently available data pooled from 3 phase 1/2 clinical trials in breast cancer, NSCLC, and colorectal cancer. Here we report the development of the population PK model for patritumab deruxtecan in patients with solid tumors. The population PK model provided an updated understanding of the population PK characteristics of patritumab deruxtecan given the current data. It also enabled downstream exposure–response analyses, which will be reported elsewhere.

Methods

Ethical Compliance

The protocols of all included studies were approved by the locally relevant investigational review board or human patients committee (Table S1 lists all study sites and the investigational review board or human subjects committee that approved the relevant study protocol at that location). All patients provided written informed consent prior to participation in the included studies.

Clinical Studies and Pharmacokinetic Data

Study U31402‐A‐J101 (NCT02980341) is an ongoing, first‐in‐human, phase 1/2, dose‐escalation and ‐expansion trial of patritumab deruxtecan in patients with HER3‐expressing metastatic breast cancer. Study U31402‐A‐U102 (NCT03260491) is an ongoing, phase 1, dose‐escalation and ‐expansion trial of patritumab deruxtecan in patients with NSCLC. Study U31402‐A‐U202 (NCT04479436) was a phase 2, open‐label trial of patritumab deruxtecan in patients with advanced or metastatic colorectal cancer. Hereafter, these studies will be referred to as J101, U102, and U202, respectively.

Patritumab deruxtecan was administered via intravenous infusion and was supplied as a frozen liquid for all patients in J101 and as lyophilized powder for all patients in U202. Patients in U102 received the frozen liquid formulation in the dose‐escalation portion of the study and the lyophilized powder formulation in the dose‐expansion phase of the study. Table 1 lists the dosing regimens and PK sampling schedules for all cohorts in the 3 studies. Patritumab deruxtecan 1.6 to 8.0 mg/kg was given generally every 3 weeks (Q3W) and, to a small cohort of patients (n = 12), every 2 weeks (Q2W). The frequencies of Q3W and Q2W were supported by preclinical toxicological data; Q3W was found to be more favorable than Q2W in the clinic and was hence selected (unpublished data). Intensive PK schedules were planned for ≥2 cycles (cycle 1 and cycles 2 or 3) for each cohort, supplemented with sparse sampling for other cycles.

Bioanalytical assays for measuring DXd‐conjugated antibody (the PK entity representative of intact patritumab conjugated with ≥1 molecule of DXd) and unconjugated DXd in serum samples were developed and validated at PPD Bioanalytical Lab (Richmond, Virginia) in accordance with the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) guidance for industry on bioanalytical method validation. The assay for DXd‐conjugated antibody was an enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay within a nominal range of 100 to 4000 ng/mL; the assay for unconjugated DXd was a liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry assay within a nominal range of 10 to 2000 pg/mL.

The dataset for population PK analysis included all patients with evaluable PK data for DXd‐conjugated antibody (for the modeling of intact patritumab deruxtecan) or for both DXd‐conjugated antibody and unconjugated DXd (for the modeling of DXd). PK observations below the lower limits of quantification (LLOQs) were excluded if the exclusion was judged unlikely to bias the PK characterization. For covariate evaluation, the missed values were imputed to the median of the population if a continuous covariate had <5% missingness; for a categorical covariate, the patients with missingness were categorized into a missing/unknown group.

Population PK Model Development

The development of the population PK model was informed by the earlier internal analysis and graphical exploration of the current dataset, and followed a stepwise approach. First, the PK of DXd‐conjugated antibody was modeled. Then, the PK of unconjugated DXd was modeled with the parameters for DXd‐conjugated antibody (including fixed‐ and random‐effect parameters) fixed to the estimates from the first step. Model building in each step progressed from the base model to the covariate model and then to the final model.

Population PK Modeling for DXd‐Conjugated Antibody

Base Model

The structure for the DXd‐conjugated antibody PK model was a 2‐compartment model (Figure 1) with parallel linear (CLlin) and nonlinear (CLnonlin; Michaelis–Menten) clearance (Equation 1): where Vmax is the maximum nonlinear clearance, CDXdAb is the concentration of DXd‐conjugated antibody in the central compartment, and Km is the concentration associated with half Vmax.

The rate of total elimination (Rel) of DXd‐conjugated antibody from the body was represented by the sum of the 2 clearance processes (Equation 2):  

The structure of parallel linear and nonlinear clearance has been used for population PK modeling of biologics and ADCs to account for nonspecific and specific (receptor‐ or target‐mediated) elimination, respectively. A simpler structure with only CLlin was also tested for its suitability for describing the data.

Interindividual variability (IIV) was estimated on the CLlin and central volume (Vc). A combined additive and proportional residual error model was used to account for unexplained variability.

Covariate Evaluation

Covariate evaluation in the analysis was intended to obtain a preliminary understanding of important covariates to inform further development of patritumab deruxtecan; definitive evaluation of the effects of all intrinsic and extrinsic factors of interest will become appropriate with richer data at a later stage. The evaluation was guided by our current understanding of covariates impacting the PK of monoclonal antibodies (eg, weight, albumin level, and sex), and by drug development‐specific interest (eg, understanding the impact of drug formulation, tumor type, race, and hepatic and renal function on PK). The covariates at baseline that were evaluated included weight, age, sex (female vs reference male), race (Black, Asian, or other/unknown vs reference White), race–country (Asian but not from Japanese sites, termed Asian–non‐Japan, or non‐Asian/unknown vs reference Asian from Japanese sites, termed Asian–Japan), albumin level, creatinine clearance (CrCL, as a measure of renal function), hepatic function (mild impairment, moderate impairment, or missing vs reference normal according to the criteria of the National Cancer Institute Organ Dysfunction Working Group), baseline tumor size (represented by sum of diameters), Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status (1 vs reference 0), tumor type (breast cancer or colorectal cancer vs reference NSCLC), and drug formulation (frozen liquid vs reference lyophilized powder) (Table S2). An evaluation of the impact of HER3 expression level on PK was not feasible because HER3 expression data were generally lacking for the analysis population. No evaluation of the impact of anti‐drug antibodies on PK was performed because an exploratory analysis of data from J101 and U102 found that the rate of immunogenicity was low (only 2.3% of patients were antidrug antibody‐positive post baseline; the effect of antidrug antibody on PK will be assessed when a large enough dataset becomes available).

Covariate evaluation was conducted using a combination of empirical Bayesian estimate‐based plot examination (random effect, η, vs covariate plots) and a stepwise forward‐addition (at P < .05 level) and backward‐elimination (at P < .01 level) approach. The utilities of the η versus covariate plots were confirmed by the reasonably low estimated η shrinkages. The evaluation was guided by the η versus covariate plots, prior knowledge of covariate effects on monoclonal antibodies, specific project needs, and pharmacological plausibility. Nested models were differentiated based on the change in objective function value (OFV) and the likelihood ratio test.

Final Model

The final covariate model was accepted as the final model.

Population PK Modeling for Unconjugated DXd

Base Model

• Option 1. The release rate (Rrelease) is a linear function of the level of DXd‐conjugated antibody in the central compartment (ADXdAb); the 2 terms are related via a release rate constant (Krel), the molecular weights of DXd (MWDXd, 493.5 g/mol) and patritumab deruxtecan (MWDXdAb, approx. 150 000 g/mol), and the payload‐to‐intact drug ratio (PIR, assumed to be 8) (Equation 3):  

• Option 2. Rrelease is proportional to the total elimination rate of DXd‐conjugated antibody (Equation 4):  

• Option 3. Rrelease is equal to the sum of the previous 2 processes.

The focus of the base model development was to identify a suitable structural model for describing the release of DXd from the conjugated antibody. Earlier, different structures were used to model the release of DXd from 2 related ADCs (trastuzumab deruxtecan and datopotamab deruxtecan) to obtain adequate descriptions of the PK of unconjugated DXd. Here, 3 options were evaluated for the description of DXd release:  

Note that these options represent empirical functions for fitting the PK data for unconjugated DXd but were not intended to suggest different mechanisms of release from the conjugated antibody.

The PIR, with a baseline value (PIR0) of 8, was allowed to change with time if necessary, and 2 time‐dependent patterns were considered. The first pattern, denoted factor 1, differentiated cycle 1 from later cycles, prompted by the PK temporal profile of unconjugated DXd (Equation 5): where θ is an unknown parameter that is to be estimated.

The second pattern, denoted factor 2, allowed an exponential decrease in PIR (from the PIR0 of 8 to 1) with time within each dosing cycle while the pattern was held constant across cycles (Equation 6): where α = 0.125 and β denotes the exponential decline rate constant (α and β together restrain factor 2 in the range of 0.125 to 1, resulting in a modified PIR between 1 and 8).

Both patterns were found to be necessary for the adequate fitting of the PK profiles of unconjugated DXd across cycles and within each cycle (Equation 7):  

The distribution and elimination of unconjugated DXd were described using a 1‐compartment model with linear clearance (Figure 1), based on previous experience with datopotamab deruxtecan and trastuzumab deruxtecan. IIV was estimated on the release‐related parameters (Krel in option 1 and CLlin in option 2) and clearance of DXd. Unexplained variability was described using a combined additive and proportional residual error model.

Covariate Evaluation

Covariate evaluation for DXd was limited to a short list of potentially plausible and clinically relevant factors. A stepwise covariate search was considered unnecessary in this analysis because the model built for DXd here was to establish a suitable and parsimonious model structure to enable the ensuing exposure–response analyses. Furthermore, the PK of unconjugated DXd is limited by its release from intact patritumab deruxtecan, so a covariate effect in the DXd model may reflect the release of DXd rather than the real effect on unconjugated DXd PK per se. Therefore, covariate evaluation for the DXd model will be appropriate only after a thorough understanding is achieved for the population PK (including covariate effects) of the DXd‐conjugated antibody.

Based on the understanding that the release of DXd predominantly occurs via the clearance of DXd‐conjugated antibody, covariates that were identified as affecting the clearance of DXd‐conjugated antibody were evaluated simultaneously on Krel in the DXd model (if that parameter was in the model). Weight and hepatic function were evaluated simultaneously on the clearance of DXd; these covariate candidates were considered physiologically and pharmacologically plausible based on current knowledge. Removal of covariates from the list was permitted if the simultaneous incorporation of all the covariates was found to be inappropriate. Additionally, the effect of CrCL was evaluated to confirm the expectation that the elimination of DXd is not affected by renal impairment. 

Final Model

The final covariate model was accepted as the final model.

Population PK Model Evaluation

The population PK models were evaluated based on convergence, OFV, model stability, precision and plausibility of parameter estimates, and diagnostic plots. For the final models, a visual predictive check (VPC) and prediction‐corrected VPC (pcVPC) were performed. The pcVPC was focused on the prediction‐corrected PK profiles in cycle 1 and cycles ≥2 of all dosing regimens, and the VPC was focused on the exposure metrics (maximum concentration of drug in serum, Cmax, trough concentration, Ctrough, and total area under the serum drug concentration–time curve over the dosage interval, AUCtau) at 5.6 mg/kg Q3W (which was considered a key dosage for further development) in cycle 1 and cycles ≥2 for both DXd‐conjugated antibody and unconjugated DXd.

Population PK Model Application

Simulations of Covariate Effects

The effects of covariates on the PK of DXd‐conjugated antibody and unconjugated DXd were demonstrated in 2 sets of simulations: univariate and multivariate simulations. The univariate simulations evaluated the effects of covariates 1 by 1 on the exposures of DXd‐conjugated antibody and unconjugated DXd; when a covariate was being evaluated, all other covariates were set to their respective reference values/states (ie, their effects were removed). For each covariate, the related parameter reflecting its effect was randomly sampled 200 times from the mean and standard error reported by NONMEM (ICON Development Solutions, Leopardstown, Dublin, Ireland), thus resulting in a population of 200 patients. Exposures of DXd‐conjugated antibody and unconjugated DXd at 5.6 mg/kg Q3W in cycles 1 and 5 (with cycle 5 representing the steady state, although the PK was considered to have reached steady state at cycle 3 based on noncompartmental analysis) were simulated. Exposure metrics (Cmax and AUCtau) were summarized and normalized to those in a reference patient (a male with weight of 60 kg, albumin level of 39 g/L, NSCLC, and normal hepatic function, as hepatic function is relevant to DXd). The reference‐normalized exposure metrics were visualized in forest plots.

Covariate effects on exposures of DXd‐conjugated antibody and unconjugated DXd from multivariate simulations were considered clinically more relevant. The multivariate simulations considered potential correlations among covariates and reflected the joint impacts of those covariates in a clinical setting. A total of 2000 patients were bootstrapped from the analysis population by the covariates retained in the final population PK models: weight, albumin level, sex, tumor type, and hepatic function. Exposures were simulated at 5.6 mg/kg Q3W for the population, with a consideration of IIVs but not of parameter uncertainty. Exposure metrics (Cmax, Ctrough, and AUCtau) in cycle 1 and at steady state (represented by cycle 5) were summarized by covariate and visualized.

Simulations of Exposures in Virtual Patient Populations

Exposures of DXd‐conjugated antibody and unconjugated DXd were simulated at 5.6 mg/kg Q3W in patients with different tumor types (breast cancer, NSCLC, and colorectal cancer). The virtual patient populations with these 3 tumor types (n = 200 patients per tumor type) were created in a manner similar to those used for previous multivariate simulations. A single simulation run was executed for up to 6 dosing cycles, with a consideration of IIVs but not of parameter uncertainties or residual errors. The time‐course PK profiles were visualized and exposure metrics (Cmax, Ctrough, and AUCtau) were summarized. In addition, a simulation was carried out in a similar manner to derive exposure metrics for Asian patients (n = 200) versus non‐Asian patients (n = 200) with NSCLC. Differences in exposures between the 2 populations are often of clinical interest because of the body‐weight difference.

Modeling Software

Data preparation, exploration, and model postprocessing were performed using R 3.6.3 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). Population PK modeling was performed using NONMEM 7.3 with the first‐order conditional estimation with interaction (FOCEI) algorithm. The analysis was conducted on the Metworx platform managed by the Metrum Research Group (Tariffville, Connecticu).

Results

Analysis Data Set

The pooled population PK analysis dataset included 6986 (DXd‐conjugated antibody) and 7152 (DXd) observations from 425 patients. Three patients from U102 lacked PK data and were not included in the dataset. All PK observations for DXd‐conjugated antibody and unconjugated DXd in the dataset were above the respective LLOQs. The distribution of patients and observations by tumor type and dose are listed in Table S3. The majority of data were from patients receiving 5.6 mg/kg (55% of patients), followed by patients receiving 6.4 and 4.8 mg/kg (21% and 15% of patients, respectively). A total of 51% of patients had NSCLC, 40% had breast cancer, and 9% had colorectal cancer. Data excluded from the analysis included: (1) data from 13 patients with PK observations for unconjugated DXd but not for DXd‐conjugated antibody and (2) PK observations beyond the first 200 days. The PK observations after day 200 involved 10 and 12 trough observations for DXd‐conjugated antibody and unconjugated DXd, respectively. The exclusion of those observations shortened the model run time by ≥40%, hence expediting model development without affecting modeling results.

The PK profiles for DXd‐conjugated antibody and unconjugated DXd are illustrated in Figure 2. The cycle‐1 profile for DXd‐conjugated antibody suggested that a 2‐compartment model would be suitable for description of the data, and the profile up to day 200 (approximately 10 cycles) suggested limited accumulation with repeated dosing. The cycle‐1 profile for unconjugated DXd suggested apparent 2‐compartment behavior, which was likely governed by the release of DXd from intact patritumab deruxtecan. The profile up to day 200 demonstrated a difference between cycle 1 and later cycles: the peak concentration in cycle 1 appeared to be sharply higher than in later cycles.

The distributions of baseline covariates are shown in Tables S4 and S5. Notable correlations/associations were found between the following covariates (Figures S1–S3): weight and CrCL; age and CrCL; weight and sex, race/race–country, tumor type, and CrCL; age and ECOG performance status, tumor type, and CrCL; and tumor type and drug formulation. The numbers of patients in the following categories were too small to warrant a meaningful evaluation of the effects: race (Black, other/unknown), race–country (missing/unknown), and hepatic function (moderate impairment, missing/unknown).

Population PK Analysis

DXd‐Conjugated Antibody Modeling

The final base model, a 2‐compartment model with parallel linear and nonlinear clearance (Figure 1), adequately described the PK data for DXd‐conjugated antibody. The parameter estimates were plausible and had good precision, and the shrinkages of random effects (IIVs and residual errors) were estimated to be low (Table S6). The additive error was fixed to the LLOQ of 100 ng/mL, as it could not be estimated reliably (the estimate was 606 ng/mL with a standard error >3 × 109). The diagnostic plots demonstrated satisfactory performance of the model (data not shown). A simpler model with only linear clearance was found to be inferior, as it notably overpredicted the PK tail in each cycle (Figure S4) and was thus rejected.

The η versus covariate plots of the final base model revealed apparent associations between the η of CLlin and all the candidate covariates, except age, and between the η of Vc and weight (Figure S5). The covariate modeling statistically evaluated the effects of weight, albumin level, sex, drug formulation, tumor type, race, CrCL, and hepatic function in a stepwise manner. The final covariate model included effects of weight, albumin level, sex, and tumor type (breast cancer; the colorectal cancer effect was insignificant relative to the reference NSCLC) on CLlin and weight on Vc. The parameter estimates are listed in Table 2. No residual trend was apparent in the η versus covariate plots from the final covariate model, except for race (Black) and hepatic function (moderate impairment, missing), for which the data were too limited to evaluate (Figure S6). Weight explained 23.9% of the variance of IIV of CLlin and 52% of the variance of IIV of Vc, whereas albumin level, sex, and tumor type each explained only 2.1% to 5.4% of the variance of IIV of CLlin.

The final covariate model was accepted as the final model for DXd‐conjugated antibody. The diagnostic plots indicated the adequate performance of the model (Figures 3 and S7). The pcVPC and VPC showed that the model reproduced the prediction‐corrected PK profile and the exposure metrics (Cmax, Ctrough, and AUCtau) reasonably well, especially for cycles 2 and beyond (Figure S8).

Unconjugated DXd Modeling

The final base model featured a 1‐compartment structure with linear clearance and release of DXd as a first‐order function of the level of DXd‐conjugated antibody in its central compartment (Equation 3). The PIR in the first‐order function was modified by time‐dependent factor 1 and factor 2 (Equations (5), (6), (7)). The additive error in the combined residual error model was fixed to 0.01 ng/mL (the LLOQ for DXd), as the estimation of the additive error was not reliable and led to the failure of the covariance step. This model was able to describe the profile of unconjugated DXd adequately, and the diagnostic plots overall suggested satisfactory model performance (Figure S9). The parameter estimates were plausible and had good precision, and the shrinkages of random effects (IIVs and residual errors) were estimated to be low (Table S7).

The covariate evaluation started with the simultaneous incorporation of the effects of weight, albumin level, sex, and tumor type on Krel and the effect of weight and hepatic function on clearance of unconjugated DXd (CLDXd) into the final base model. This covariate model did not converge. To simplify the model, only the effects of weight on Krel and hepatic function on CLDXd were kept in the model: this was because weight was the most influential covariate on DXd‐conjugated antibody clearance, and hepatic function but not weight showed an apparent trend on the η–CLDXd versus covariate plots. The simplified model converged, had a favorable OFV relative to the final base model (ΔOFV = 79.5 U, with the addition of 3 parameters), and described the data adequately. The covariates reduced the variances of IIVs of Krel and CLDXd by 4.9% and 13.1%, respectively. This covariate model was recognized as the final covariate model. Using this model, the effect of CrCL on CLDXd was statistically evaluated and was found to be insignificant (ΔOFV ≈ 0; P > .05) and negligible (parameter estimates near 0), confirming the lack of impact of renal function on DXd PK.

The final covariate model was accepted as the final model. The parameter estimates are shown in Table 3. The pcVPC and VPC showed that the model reproduced the prediction‐corrected PK profile and the exposure metrics (Cmax, Ctrough, and AUCtau) reasonably well (Figure S8).

Population PK Model Application

Impacts of Covariate Effects on Exposures

The effects of weight, albumin level, sex (female vs reference male), and tumor type (breast cancer vs reference NSCLC) on the cycle‐1 and steady‐state exposure metrics of DXd‐conjugated antibody and unconjugated DXd from univariate simulations are illustrated in Figure 4. For DXd‐conjugated antibody, Cmax and AUCtau increased with weight, although the effect over the 5th to 95th percentile of weight in the analysis population was generally in the range of ±20% from the reference of 1, with the effect on cycle‐1 AUCtau extending slightly beyond the range for the 5th (−23%) and 95th (+27%) percentiles. The effects of other covariates were in the range of ±20%, except for breast cancer on steady‐state AUCtau, which was 21% higher than the reference of 1. For DXd, weight and hepatic function (mild impairment) had notable effects on Cmax and AUCtau, extending beyond the range of ±20% from the reference, in cycle 1 and at steady state.

The covariate effects on the exposure metrics from multivariate simulations (Figure S10) were generally comparable with those from the univariate simulations.

Simulated Exposures in Virtual Patient Populations

Simulated exposure metrics at 5.6 mg/kg Q3W in the virtual patient populations are summarized in Table 4. The half‐lives of DXd‐conjugated antibody and unconjugated DXd, estimated from the simulated cycle‐1 PK profiles at 5.6 mg/kg in NSCLC, were both 7.3 days (SD, 2.6 days). Based on the simulated AUCtau in cycle 1 and at steady state, the accumulation of DXd‐conjugated antibody and unconjugated DXd is expected to be minimal, with projected accumulation indices of approximately 1.5 and 0.9, respectively. Among patients with NSCLC, the exposure in Asian patients was mildly lower than that in non‐Asian patients (Table S8). At steady state, the Cmax in Asian patients was lower than in non‐Asian patients by 8.9% for DXd‐conjugated antibody and by 9.4% for unconjugated DXd, and the AUCtau in Asian patients was lower than that in non‐Asian patients by 15.6% for DXd‐conjugated antibody and by 13.2% for unconjugated DXd.

Discussion

Model‐informed drug development (MIDD) has been recognized as an essential approach for enhancing the efficiency of drug development. One application of MIDD is optimizing the dose and dosing regimen for pivotal trials based on data from preclinical and early clinical development. The development of patritumab deruxtecan as an antitumor therapy has benefited from the application of MIDD, reflected by the influences of 2 rounds of population PK and exposure–response modeling. The first round in early 2020, based on J101 (in breast cancer) and U102 (in NSCLC), yielded a preliminary understanding of the population PK and exposure–response relationships for DXd‐conjugated antibody and unconjugated DXd in patients with breast cancer and NSCLC. The analysis suggested an association between the 5.6‐mg/kg Q3W dosing regimen and a clinically meaningful objective response rate and an overall acceptable and manageable safety profile, justifying the selection of the 5.6‐mg/kg Q3W dosage of patritumab deruxtecan for further investigation in the phase 2 trial in NSCLC (NCT04619004; HERTHENA‐Lung01; Study U31402‐A‐U201). With emerging data from J101, U102, and U202, the second round of analysis in late 2021 aimed to further evaluate the dosage selection (ie, whether the 5.6‐mg/kg Q3W dosing remained optimal). The analyses continued to suggest positive relationships between exposure of DXd‐conjugated antibody and efficacy (objective response rate) and between exposures of DXd‐conjugated antibody or unconjugated DXd and safety end points of interest. The integrated benefit‐to‐risk analysis continued to support 5.6 mg/kg Q3W as the optimal dosing regimen for further development.

The population PK of DXd‐conjugated antibody was described using a 2‐compartment model with parallel linear and nonlinear clearance processes. This model was similar to that used in a previous analysis of the related ADC datopotamab deruxtecan. Linear clearance was quantitatively more important than nonlinear clearance at doses of ≥4.8 mg/kg. The nonlinear clearance component was critical for an adequate description of the PK tail in each dosing cycle. To provide accurate exposure metrics (Ctrough, Cmax, AUC, and average concentration over time) over a wide dose range (1.6 to 8.0 mg/kg) to enable an exposure–response analysis, it was thus essential to include both clearance processes in the population PK model.

We were interested in understanding how covariates—such as weight, age, sex, race (or country), albumin level, renal (CrCL) and hepatic function, baseline tumor size (sum of diameters), ECOG performance status, tumor type, and drug formulation—affect the PK of DXd‐conjugated antibody and, if necessary, taking these effects into consideration during the development of patritumab deruxtecan. Covariate evaluation identified weight, albumin level, sex, and tumor type (breast cancer) as significant covariates (P < .05) on CLlin and weight as a significant covariate (P < .05) on Vc. The effects of weight, albumin level, and sex are consistent with our current understanding of population PK characteristics of biologics; however, the mechanistic basis of the tumor‐type effect identified with patritumab deruxtecan (eg, why CLlin in breast cancer was approximately 19% lower than in NSCLC) is currently not known. The effects of these covariates on the cycle‐1 and steady‐state exposure metrics (Cmax and AUCtau) of DXd‐conjugated antibody were generally mild and did not warrant dose adjustment in the next stage of development. Additionally, simulations demonstrated only a small difference in exposures between Asian and non‐Asian patients with NSCLC, despite a difference of 13 kg in mean body weight between the 2 populations. No effects of race, race–country, CrCL, mild hepatic impairment, or drug formulation were found to be significant. The lack of drug formulation effect was compatible with an earlier analysis of the U102 study. 

The population PK of unconjugated DXd was described using a 1‐compartment model with linear clearance. Among the 3 options tested for describing the release of DXd, the one using a first‐order time‐dependent function of the level of DXd‐conjugated antibody in the central compartment (Equations 3 and (5), (6), (7)) was found to be adequate for the current dataset and suitable for the purpose of the model (primarily to enable an exposure‐response analysis). It should be noted that this model structure was data driven based on an empirical approach for describing the data; this model was not intended to reflect the mechanism by which unconjugated DXd in serum is released from the intact ADC. The mechanism for the time dependency in payload release and the differences in the unconjugated DXd concentration between cycle 1 and later cycles is yet to be studied. This time‐dependent pattern is not unique to patritumab deruxtecan; it was observed previously and implemented in the population PK analysis of trastuzumab deruxtecan and brentuximab vedotin. 

The preliminary covariate evaluation identified mild hepatic impairment as a significant covariate on DXd clearance: the ratio of clearance in patients with mild hepatic impairment versus that in a reference patient with normal hepatic function was estimated to be 0.706 (95%CI 0.609 to 0.803). This effect translates to an approximately 20% to 36% increase (cycle 1 and steady state, respectively) in Cmax and a 42% increase in AUCtau in patients with mild hepatic impairment. The effect of moderate hepatic function was not estimated, as the relevant data were too limited (n = 6) for the evaluation to be reliable using the population PK approach. Nevertheless, the results of the covariate evaluation suggested the potential for an increase in DXd exposure in patients with hepatic impairment. This possibility calls for further investigation of the PK of DXd and, more importantly, safety in subgroups with different degrees of hepatic impairment.

In summary, we developed population PK models that successfully described the PK data from 3 studies of patritumab deruxtecan. The population PK analysis along with a subsequent exposure–response analysis supported the selection of 5.6 mg/kg Q3W for further investigation. The generally mild covariate effects identified from the preliminary covariate evaluation did not require dose adjustment for subpopulations in subsequent development. Further PK characterization for patritumab deruxtecan will evolve with emerging data.

Conflicts of Interest

Y.L., N.T., L.H., M.L., and M.A. are employees of and hold stock and/or stock options with Daiichi Sankyo, Inc. S.S. is an employee of and holds stock options with Daiichi Sankyo Co, Ltd. R.S. is an employee of Daiichi Sankyo Co, Ltd. R.S. was an employee and received stock and/or stock options from Daiichi Sankyo, Inc. during the drafting of the article.

Data Sharing

Anonymized individual participant data (IPD) and applicable supporting clinical study documents may be made available upon request at https://vivli.org/. In cases where clinical study data and supporting documents are provided pursuant to our company policies and procedures, Daiichi Sankyo Companies will continue to protect the privacy of the company and our clinical study subjects. Details on the data‐sharing criteria and the procedure for requesting access can be found at: https://vivli.org/ourmember/daiichi‐sankyo/.

Funding

This study was funded by Daiichi Sankyo, Inc.
