---
pmid: '36124790'
doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btac462
pmcid: ''
title: 'NSF4SL: negative-sample-free contrastive learning for ranking synthetic lethal
  partner genes in human cancers.'
authors:
- Wang Shike
- Feng Yimiao
- Liu Xin
- Liu Yong
- Wu Min
- Zheng Jie
journal: Bioinformatics (Oxford, England)
year: 2022
month: 9
volume: '38'
issue: Suppl_2
pages: ii13-ii19
is_oa: true
oa_status: bronze
oa_url: https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article-pdf/38/Supplement_2/ii13/49886444/btac462.pdf
cited_by_count: 17
mesh_terms:
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Genes, Lethal
- Humans
- Neoplasms
- Software
- Synthetic Lethal Mutations
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- synthetic-lethality
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Bioinformatics and Genomic Networks
diseases_annotated:
- SLs
- cancer
- cancers
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 12
icite_rcr: 0.6813972101364729
icite_percentile: 36.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# NSF4SL: negative-sample-free contrastive learning for ranking synthetic lethal partner genes in human cancers.

## Abstract

**MOTIVATION**: Detecting synthetic lethality (SL) is a promising strategy for identifying anti-cancer drug targets. Targeting SL partners of a primary gene mutated in cancer is selectively lethal to cancer cells. Due to high cost of wet-lab experiments and availability of gold standard SL data, supervised machine learning for SL prediction has been popular. However, most of the methods are based on binary classification and thus limited by the lack of reliable negative data. Contrastive learning can train models without any negative sample and is thus promising for finding novel SLs.

**RESULTS**: We propose NSF4SL, a negative-sample-free SL prediction model based on a contrastive learning framework. It captures the characteristics of positive SL samples by using two branches of neural networks that interact with each other to learn SL-related gene representations. Moreover, a feature-wise data augmentation strategy is used to mitigate the sparsity of SL data. NSF4SL significantly outperforms all baselines which require negative samples, even in challenging experimental settings. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that SL prediction is formulated as a gene ranking problem, which is more practical than the current formulation as binary classification. NSF4SL is the first contrastive learning method for SL prediction and its success points to a new direction of machine-learning methods for identifying novel SLs.

**AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION**: Our source code is available at https://github.com/JieZheng-ShanghaiTech/NSF4SL.

**SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION**: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
