---
pmid: '36253536'
doi: 10.1038/s41568-022-00513-x
pmcid: ''
title: Targeting the gut microbiota for cancer therapy.
authors:
- Fernandes Miriam R
- Aggarwal Poonam
- Costa Raquel G F
- Cole Alicia M
- Trinchieri Giorgio
journal: Nature reviews. Cancer
year: 2022
month: 12
volume: '22'
issue: '12'
pages: 703-722
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 258
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome
- Immunotherapy
- Fecal Microbiota Transplantation
- Neoplasms
- Microbiota
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- microbiome
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Gut microbiota and health
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- toxicity
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 219
icite_rcr: 14.875649712054301
icite_percentile: 98.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.95
icite_enriched: true
---

# Targeting the gut microbiota for cancer therapy.

## Abstract

Growing evidence suggests that the gut microbiota modulates the efficacy and toxicity of cancer therapy, most notably immunotherapy and its immune-related adverse effects. The poor response to immunotherapy in patients treated with antibiotics supports this influential role of the microbiota. Until recently, results pertaining to the identification of the microbial species responsible for these effects were incongruent, and relatively few studies analysed the underlying mechanisms. A better understanding of the taxonomy of the species involved and of the mechanisms of action has since been achieved. Defined bacterial species have been shown to promote an improved response to immune-checkpoint inhibitors by producing different products or metabolites. However, a suppressive effect of Gram-negative bacteria may be dominant in some unresponsive patients. Machine learning approaches trained on the microbiota composition of patients can predict the ability of patients to respond to immunotherapy with some accuracy. Thus, interest in modulating the microbiota composition to improve patient responsiveness to therapy has been mounting. Clinical proof-of-concept studies have demonstrated that faecal microbiota transplantation or dietary interventions might be utilized clinically to improve the success rate of immunotherapy in patients with cancer. Here, we review recent advances and discuss emerging strategies for microbiota-based cancer therapies.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
