---
pmid: '36266192'
doi: 10.1016/j.diii.2022.09.009
pmcid: ''
title: 'Irreversible electroporation and electrochemotherapy in oncology: State of
  the art.'
authors:
- Tasu Jean-Pierre
- Tougeron David
- Rols Marie-Pierre
journal: Diagnostic and interventional imaging
year: 2022
month: 11
volume: '103'
issue: '11'
pages: 499-509
is_oa: true
oa_status: green
oa_url: https://hal.science/hal-03842460/document
cited_by_count: 67
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Electrochemotherapy
- Medical Oncology
- Electroporation
- Neoplasms
- Antineoplastic Agents
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- electrochemical-therapy
cancer_types:
- kidney
- melanoma
- prostate
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- bleomycin
- cisplatin
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Microbial Inactivation Methods
diseases_annotated:
- cutaneous and subcutaneous tumors
- liver and prostate cancers
- liver, kidney, bone, or lung tumors
- melanoma
- pancreatic and renal cancers
- thermal injuries
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 59
icite_rcr: 5.469665102483241
icite_percentile: 93.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.95
icite_enriched: true
---

# Irreversible electroporation and electrochemotherapy in oncology: State of the art.

## Abstract

Thermal tumor ablation techniques including radiofrequency, microwave, LASER, high-intensity focused ultrasound and cryoablation are routinely used to treated liver, kidney, bone, or lung tumors. However, all these techniques are thermal and can therefore be affected by heat sink effect, which can lead to incomplete ablation, and thermal injuries of non-targeted tissues are possible. Under certain conditions, high voltage pulsed electric field can induce formation of pores in the cell membrane. This phenomenon, called electropermeabilization, is also known as "electroporation". Under certain conditions, electroporation can be irreversible, leading to cell death. Irreversible electroporation has demonstrated efficacy for the treatment of liver and prostate cancers, whereas data are scarce regarding pancreatic and renal cancers. During reversible electroporation, transient cell permeability can be used to introduce cytotoxic drugs into tumor cells (commonly bleomycin or cisplatin). Reversible electroporation used in conjunction with cytotoxic drugs shows promise in terms of oncological response, particularly for solid cutaneous and subcutaneous tumors such as melanoma. Irreversible and reversible electroporation are both not thermal ablation techniques and therefore open a new promising horizon for tumor ablation.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
