---
pmid: '36309080'
doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2022.115329
pmcid: ''
title: A PARP1 PROTAC as a novel strategy against PARP inhibitor resistance via promotion
  of ferroptosis in p53-positive breast cancer.
authors:
- Li Ge
- Lin Shan-Shan
- Yu Ze-Lei
- Wu Xin-Hua
- Liu Jing-Wen
- Tu Gui-Hui
- Liu Quan-Yu
- Tang Yuan-Ling
- Jiang Qing-Na
- Xu Jian-Hua
- Huang Qing-Ling
- Wu Li-Xian
journal: Biochemical pharmacology
year: 2022
month: 12
volume: '206'
issue: ''
pages: '115329'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 57
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Antineoplastic Agents
- BRCA1 Protein
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Ferroptosis
- Poly (ADP-Ribose) Polymerase-1
- Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors
- Proteolysis
- Triple Negative Breast Neoplasms
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53
- Female
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- synthetic-lethality
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes:
- PARP
- PARP1
- SLC7A11
- p53
- poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1
drugs:
- NN3
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: PARP inhibition in cancer therapy
diseases_annotated:
- TNBC
- breast cancer
- cancer
- homologous recombination
- toxicity
- triple-negative breast cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 47
icite_rcr: 3.3690390941414976
icite_percentile: 87.2
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# A PARP1 PROTAC as a novel strategy against PARP inhibitor resistance via promotion of ferroptosis in p53-positive breast cancer.

## Abstract

Therapeutic targeting of the nuclear enzyme poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) with PARP inhibitors (PARPis) in patients with a homologous recombination (HR)- deficient phenotype based on the mechanism of synthetic lethality has been shown tremendous success in cancer therapy. With the clinical use of various PARPis, emerging evidence has shown that some PARPis offer hope for breakthroughs in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) therapy, regardless of HR status. However, similar to other conventional cytotoxic drugs, PARPis are also subject to the intractable problem of drug resistance. Notably, acquired resistance to PARPis caused by point mutations in the PARP1 protein is hard to overcome with current strategies. To explore modalities to overcome resistance and identify patients who are most likely to benefit from PARP1-targeted therapy, we developed a proteolysis-targeted chimaera (PROTAC) to degrade mutant PARP1 in TNBC. Here, we investigated a PARP1 PROTAC termed "NN3″, which triggered ubiquitination and proteasome-mediated degradation of PARP1. Moreover, NN3 degraded PARP1 with resistance-related mutations. Interestingly, compared with other reported PARP1 degraders, NN3 exhibited a unique antitumor mechanism in p53-positive breast cancer cells that effectively promoted ferroptosis by downregulating the SLC7A11 pathway. Furthermore, NN3 showed potent activity and low toxicity in vivo. In conclusion, we propose PROTAC-mediated degradation of PARP1 as a novel strategy against mutation-related PARPi resistance and a paradigm for targeting breast cancer with functional p53 via ferroptosis induction.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
