---
pmid: '36350285'
doi: 10.1039/d2bm01281b
pmcid: ''
title: Combined phototherapy with metabolic reprogramming-targeted albumin nanoparticles
  for treating breast cancer.
authors:
- Le Xuan Thien
- Lee Junyeong
- Nguyen Nguyen Thi
- Lee Woo Tak
- Lee Eun Seong
- Oh Kyung Taek
- Choi Han-Gon
- Shin Beom Soo
- Youn Yu Seok
journal: Biomaterials science
year: 2022
month: 12
volume: '10'
issue: '24'
pages: 7117-7132
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 19
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Mice
- Albumins
- Neoplasms
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- metabolic-targeting
- nanoparticle
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes:
- albumin
drugs:
- ATP
- LCIR
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer, Hypoxia, and Metabolism
diseases_annotated:
- TNBC
- Triple-negative breast cancer
- breast cancer
- cancer
- hypoxia
- toxicity
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 13
icite_rcr: 0.9849802223864588
icite_percentile: 49.7
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Combined phototherapy with metabolic reprogramming-targeted albumin nanoparticles for treating breast cancer.

## Abstract

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is characterized by rapid tumor growth and resistance to cancer therapy, and has a poor prognosis. Accumulating data have revealed that cancer metabolism relies on both the Warburg effect and oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), which are strongly related to the high proliferation and chemoresistance of cancer cells. Phototherapy is considered as a non-invasive method to precisely control drug activity with reduced side effects. Herein, our group introduced an Abraxane-like nanoplatform, named LCIR NPs, which significantly eradicates cancer cells via synergism between metabolic reprogramming and phototherapy effects. Endowed with mitochondria-targeting residues, the nanoparticles efficiently inhibited mitochondrial complexes I and IV as well as hexokinase II, leading to the depletion of intracellular ATP. Consequently, the photodynamic and photothermal effect triggered by NIR irradiation was enhanced due to the alleviation of hypoxia and the thermoresistance mechanism that rely on mitochondrial metabolism. In vivo experiments showed that the tumor size of mice that received the combination treatment was only 50.7 mm3, which was 21 times smaller than that of the untreated group and was much lower than those of other single treatments after 21 days. Additionally, almost no systemic undesired toxicity was detected during the observation period. We believe that the concept of LCIR as presented here offers a potential platform to overcome the resistance to conventional therapies by the incorporation with the energy metabolism inhibition approach.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
