---
pmid: '36399829'
doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2022.113998
pmcid: ''
title: 'Surface-engineered nanoparticles in cancer immune response and immunotherapy:
  Current status and future prospects.'
authors:
- Chen Jun
- Cong Xiufeng
journal: Biomedicine & pharmacotherapy = Biomedecine & pharmacotherapie
year: 2023
month: 1
volume: '157'
issue: ''
pages: '113998'
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2022.113998
cited_by_count: 36
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Tissue Distribution
- Immunotherapy
- Neoplasms
- Nanomedicine
- Cancer Vaccines
- Nanoparticles
- Immunity
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- nanoparticle
- oncolytic-virus
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- cancer
- infection
- metastasis
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 22
icite_rcr: 3.1114206909657343
icite_percentile: 85.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Surface-engineered nanoparticles in cancer immune response and immunotherapy: Current status and future prospects.

## Abstract

Cancer immunotherapy is a therapeutic strategy to inhibit tumor growth and metastasis by intervening in the immune response process. Strategies applied to cancer immunotherapy mainly include blocking immune checkpoints, adoptive transfer of engineered immune cells, cytokine therapy, cancer vaccines, and oncolytic virus infection. However, many factors, such as off-target side effects, immunosuppressive cell infiltration and/or upregulation of immune checkpoint expression, cancer cell heterogeneity, and lack of antigen presentation, affect the therapeutic effect of immunotherapy on cancer. To improve the efficacy of targeted immunotherapy and reduce off-target effects, over the past two decades, nanoparticle delivery platforms have been increasingly used in tumor immunotherapy. However, nanoparticles are still subject to biological barriers and biodistribution challenges, which limit their overall clinical potential. This has prompted a series of engineered nanoparticles to overcome specific obstacles and transfer the accumulation of payloads to tumor-infiltrating immune cells. In recent years, new techniques and chemical methods have been employed to modify or functionalize the surfaces of nanoparticles. This review discusses the recent progress of surface-engineered nanoparticles in inducing tumor immune responses and immunotherapy, as well as future directions for the development of next-generation nanomedicines.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
