---
pmid: '36575819'
doi: 10.1111/sji.13250
pmcid: ''
title: Identification of tumour antigens and immune subtypes in the development of
  an anti-cancer vaccine for endometrial carcinoma.
authors:
- Feng Jianyang
- He Hong
journal: Scandinavian journal of immunology
year: 2023
month: 3
volume: '97'
issue: '3'
pages: e13250
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 4
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Female
- Antigens, Neoplasm
- Cancer Vaccines
- Endometrial Neoplasms
- Antigen-Presenting Cells
- Immunity, Cellular
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- mRNA-vaccine
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- MSX1
- PARVG
- PGR
- RBPJ
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Immunotherapy and Immune Responses
diseases_annotated:
- EC
- cancer
- endometrial carcinoma
- tumour
- tumours
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 3
icite_rcr: 0.2750193961624003
icite_percentile: 14.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Identification of tumour antigens and immune subtypes in the development of an anti-cancer vaccine for endometrial carcinoma.

## Abstract

Therapeutic application of vaccines to endometrial carcinoma (EC) remains uncertain. In this study, we aimed to identify potential tumour antigens for use in the development of an anti-tumour mRNA vaccine and clarify immune subtypes and their characteristics for immunotherapeutic application in heterogeneous EC by integrating multi-omics data. Importantly, four potential tumour antigen candidates-PGR, RBPJ, PARVG and MSX1-were identified and significantly correlated with better overall survival, disease-free survival and distinct antigen-presenting cell infiltration in EC. In addition, two different immune subtypes by consensus clustering analysis of the immune-related genes were identified. Patients with C2 immunophenotypes exhibited superior survival outcomes and 'hot' immunoreactivity and harboured higher microsatellite instability scores and tumoral mutation burden but lower copy-number variation burden. Furthermore, the distinct expression of immunogenic cell death modulators and differential microenvironmental characteristics of immune-cell infiltration were also revealed between C1 and C2 immune-subtype tumours. Enrichment analysis of the co-expression of immune-related genes showed enrichment in immune response, immune cell-mediated immunity and antigen processing pathways. These results indicated that these identified tumour antigens can be used for developing antitumour mRNA vaccines, and tumours with C2 immunophenotypic characteristics demonstrated sensitivity and susceptibility to immunotherapy in EC.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
