---
pmid: '36586241'
doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2022.114180
pmcid: ''
title: 'Targeting regulatory T cells in gastric cancer: Pathogenesis, immunotherapy,
  and prognosis.'
authors:
- Wang Bingyu
- Zhang Zaibo
- Liu Wenbo
- Tan Bibo
journal: Biomedicine & pharmacotherapy = Biomedecine & pharmacotherapie
year: 2023
month: 2
volume: '158'
issue: ''
pages: '114180'
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2022.114180
cited_by_count: 31
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- T-Lymphocytes, Regulatory
- Stomach Neoplasms
- Immunotherapy
- Immunosuppression Therapy
- Autoimmunity
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types:
- gastric
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- fatty acid
- lactic acid
- magnesium
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Immune Cell Function and Interaction
diseases_annotated:
- GC
- Gastric cancer
- cancer
- gastric cancer
- malignancies
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 25
icite_rcr: 2.7952439944999563
icite_percentile: 83.4
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Targeting regulatory T cells in gastric cancer: Pathogenesis, immunotherapy, and prognosis.

## Abstract

Gastric cancer (GC) remains one of the most common malignancies worldwide. Despite immune-checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) has revolutionized cancer treatment and obtained durable clinical responses, only a fraction of GC patients benefit from it. As an important component of T cells, regulatory T cells (Tregs) play a vital role in the pathogenesis of GC, keep a core balance between immune suppression and autoimmunity, and function as predictive biomarkers for prognosis of GC patients. In this review, we discuss the role of Tregs in the pathogenesis of GC, and targeting Tregs via influencing their transcription factor, migration, co-stimulatory receptors, immune checkpoints, and cytokines. We also focus on the currently important findings of Tregs metabolism including amino acid, fatty acid, and lactic acid metabolism of GC. The emerging role of microbiome and clinical combined therapy in modulating Tregs in GC treatment is also summarized. Meanwhile, this review recapitulates a novel regulator, magnesium, is involved in mediating Tregs in GC. These research advances on Treg-related strategies provide new insights and challenges for GC progression, treatment, and prognosis. And we hope our review can stimulate further discovery and implication of mediators and pathways targeting Tregs.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
