---
pmid: '36705309'
doi: 10.4149/gpb_2022056
pmcid: ''
title: Cytoprotective effects of low-frequency pulsed electromagnetic field against
  oxidative stress in glioblastoma cells.
authors:
- Gökçek-Saraç Çiğdem
- Şimşek Tuğçe
- Karakurt Serdar
journal: General physiology and biophysics
year: 2023
month: 1
volume: '42'
issue: '1'
pages: 97-106
is_oa: true
oa_status: diamond
oa_url: http://www.elis.sk/download_file.php?product_id=7982&session_id=b1pu0rb1akcukdein2spsemm13
cited_by_count: 6
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Reactive Oxygen Species
- Electromagnetic Fields
- Antioxidants
- Hydrogen Peroxide
- Glioblastoma
- Oxidative Stress
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- frequency-therapy
cancer_types:
- glioblastoma
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs:
- H2O2
- PEMFs
- glutathione
- hydrogen peroxide
- reactive oxygen species
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Electromagnetic Fields and Biological Effects
diseases_annotated:
- glioblastoma
- neurotoxic
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 6
icite_rcr: 1.186048254441303
icite_percentile: 56.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Cytoprotective effects of low-frequency pulsed electromagnetic field against oxidative stress in glioblastoma cells.

## Abstract

The low-frequency pulsed electromagnetic field (PEMF) may have possible cytoprotective effects against the destructive effects of oxidative stress. The goal was to investigate if shortterm low-frequency PEMF has cytoprotective effects in glioblastoma cell line following high-dose hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) treatment. U87-MG cells were divided into four groups: Sham-control group; PEMF group (cells exposed to PEMF); H2O2 group (cells treated with H2O2 at time intervals 30 min and 48 h, respectively); H2O2+PEMF group (cells exposed to PEMF after H2O2 treatment at time intervals 30 min and 48 h, respectively). The cell viability, levels of reactive oxygen species, glutathione peroxidase activity, and the amount of glutathione were measured. The cytoprotective effect of PEMF against deleterious effects of oxidative stress triggered by different time interval of H2O2 treatment might be mediated by the increase in the cell viability, the elevation in the antioxidant enzyme activity/amount, and the decrease in the reactive oxygen species level. In addition, the cytoprotective effect of PEMF varies depending on different time intervals of H2O2 treatment. In the light of these findings, further in vivo and/or in vitro studies on neurophysiological effects of PEMFs and their underlying molecular mechanisms are needed to elucidate neurotoxic or neuroprotective role against antioxidant defense mechanisms.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
