---
pmid: '36809906'
doi: 10.1080/17425247.2023.2183948
pmcid: ''
title: Potential applications of drug delivery technologies against radiation enteritis.
authors:
- Liu Dongdong
- Wei Meng
- Yan Wenrui
- Xie Hua
- Sun Yingbao
- Yuan Bochuan
- Jin Yiguang
journal: Expert opinion on drug delivery
year: 2023
month: 4
volume: '20'
issue: '4'
pages: 435-455
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 14
mesh_terms:
- Male
- Humans
- Drug Delivery Systems
- Enteritis
- Neoplasms
- Colon
- Hydrogels
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types:
- prostate
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Effects of Radiation Exposure
diseases_annotated:
- RE
- Radiation
- abdominal tumors
- abdominal/pelvic cancers
- colorectal and prostate cancers
- inflammation
- pains
- radiation
- radiation enteritis
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 11
icite_rcr: 1.2138283839265245
icite_percentile: 57.4
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Potential applications of drug delivery technologies against radiation enteritis.

## Abstract

**INTRODUCTION**: The incidence of abdominal tumors, such as colorectal and prostate cancers, continually increases. Radiation therapy is widely applied in the clinical treatment of patients with abdominal/pelvic cancers, but it often unfortunately causes radiation enteritis (RE) involving the intestine, colon, and rectum. However, there is a lack of suitable treatment options for effective prevention and treatment of RE.

**AREAS COVERED**: Conventional clinical drugs for preventing and treating RE are usually applied by enemas and oral administration. Innovative gut-targeted drug delivery systems including hydrogels, microspheres, and nanoparticles are proposed to improve the prevention and curation of RE.

**EXPERT OPINION**: The prevention and treatment of RE have not attracted sufficient attention in the clinical practice, especially compared to the treatment of tumors, although RE takes patients great pains. Drug delivery to the pathological sites of RE is a huge challenge. The short retention and weak targeting of conventional drug delivery systems affect the therapeutic efficiency of anti-RE drugs. Novel drug delivery systems including hydrogels, microspheres, and nanoparticles can allow drugs long-term retention in the gut and targeting the inflammation sites to alleviate radiation-induced injury.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
