---
pmid: '37019442'
doi: 10.1002/adhm.202300481
pmcid: ''
title: Polymeric Phthalocyanine-Based Nanosensitizers for Enhanced Photodynamic and
  Sonodynamic Therapies.
authors:
- Liu Shuxin
- Ma Jinjuan
- Xue Evelyn Y
- Wang Shaolei
- Zheng Yubin
- Ng Dennis K P
- Wang Aiguo
- Zheng Nan
journal: Advanced healthcare materials
year: 2023
month: 9
volume: '12'
issue: '23'
pages: e2300481
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 22
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Mice
- Photochemotherapy
- Isoindoles
- Indoles
- Ultrasonic Therapy
- Nanoparticles
- Polymers
- Liver Neoplasms
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Reactive Oxygen Species
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
- sonodynamic
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs:
- Polymeric Phthalocyanine
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- AAAA
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 14
icite_rcr: 1.714176646215334
icite_percentile: 69.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Polymeric Phthalocyanine-Based Nanosensitizers for Enhanced Photodynamic and Sonodynamic Therapies.

## Abstract

Photodynamic therapy and sonodynamic therapy are two highly promising modalities for cancer treatment. The latter holds an additional advantage in deep-tumor therapy owing to the deep penetration of the ultrasonic radiation. The therapeutic efficacy depends highly on the photo/ultrasound-responsive properties of the sensitizers as well as their tumor-localization property and pharmacokinetics. A novel nanosensitizer system based on a polymeric phthalocyanine (pPC-TK) is reported herein in which the phthalocyanine units are connected with cleavable thioketal linkers. Such polymer could self-assemble in water forming nanoparticles with a hydrodynamic diameter of 48 nm. The degradable and flexible thioketal linkers could effectively inhibit the π-π stacking of the phthalocyanine units, rendering the resulting nanoparticles an efficient generator of reactive oxygen species upon light or ultrasonic irradiation. The nanosensitizer could be internalized into cancer cells readily, inducing cell death by efficient photodynamic and sonodynamic effects. The potency is significantly higher than that of the monomeric phthalocyanine (PC-4COOH). The nanosensitizer could also effectively inhibit the growth of tumor in liver tumor-bearing mice by these two therapies without causing noticeable side effects. More importantly, it could also retard the growth of a deep-located orthotopic liver tumor in vivo by sonodynamic therapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
