---
pmid: '37061120'
doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2023.216169
pmcid: ''
title: Radiation combined with oncolytic vaccinia virus provides pronounced antitumor
  efficacy and induces immune protection in an aggressive glioblastoma model.
authors:
- Storozynsky Quinn T
- Agopsowicz Kate C
- Noyce Ryan S
- Bukhari Amirali B
- Han Xuefei
- Snyder Natalie
- Umer Brittany A
- Gamper Armin M
- Godbout Roseline
- Evans David H
- Hitt Mary M
journal: Cancer letters
year: 2023
month: 5
volume: '562'
issue: ''
pages: '216169'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 22
mesh_terms:
- Mice
- Animals
- Oncolytic Viruses
- Vaccinia virus
- Glioblastoma
- Oncolytic Virotherapy
- Brain Neoplasms
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
- Cell Line, Tumor
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- oncolytic-virus
cancer_types:
- glioblastoma
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes:
- DeltaF4LDeltaJ2R
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Virus-based gene therapy research
diseases_annotated:
- GB
- Glioblastoma
- brain cancer
- brain tumor
- cancer
- cytotoxicity
- glioblastoma
- malignant
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 19
icite_rcr: 2.196001754608761
icite_percentile: 77.2
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Radiation combined with oncolytic vaccinia virus provides pronounced antitumor efficacy and induces immune protection in an aggressive glioblastoma model.

## Abstract

Glioblastoma (GB) is a malignant and immune-suppressed brain cancer that remains incurable despite the current standard of care. Radiotherapy is a mainstay of GB treatment, however invasive cancer cells outside the irradiated field and radioresistance preclude complete eradication of GB cells. Oncolytic virus therapy harnesses tumor-selective viruses to spread through and destroy tumors while stimulating antitumor immune responses, and thus has potential for use following radiotherapy. We demonstrate that oncolytic ΔF4LΔJ2R vaccinia virus (VACV) replicates in and induces cytotoxicity of irradiated brain tumor initiating cells in vitro. Importantly, a single 10 Gy dose of radiation combined with ΔF4LΔJ2R VACV produced considerably superior anticancer effects relative to either monotherapy when treating immune-competent orthotopic CT2A-luc mouse models-significantly extending survival and curing the majority of mice. Mice cured by the combination displayed significantly increased survival relative to naïve age-matched controls following intracranial tumor challenge, with some complete rejections. Further, the combination therapy was associated with an increased ratio of CD8+ effector T cells to regulatory T cells compared to either monotherapy. This study validates the use of radiation with an oncolytic ΔF4LΔJ2R VACV to improve treatment of this malignant brain cancer.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
