---
pmid: '37170010'
doi: 10.1007/s12032-023-02037-2
pmcid: ''
title: 'Oncogenic metabolic reprogramming in breast cancer: focus on signaling pathways
  and mitochondrial genes.'
authors:
- Malayil Rhuthuparna
- Chhichholiya Yogita
- Vasudeva Kanika
- Singh Harsh Vikram
- Singh Tashvinder
- Singh Sandeep
- Munshi Anjana
journal: Medical oncology (Northwood, London, England)
year: 2023
month: 5
volume: '40'
issue: '6'
pages: '174'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 17
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases
- Genes, Mitochondrial
- Neoplasms
- Signal Transduction
- Glycolysis
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- metabolic-targeting
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- AKT
- ERK
- Myc
- STAT3
- mTOR
drugs:
- lactate
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer, Hypoxia, and Metabolism
diseases_annotated:
- BC
- acidosis
- breast cancer
- cancer
- hypoxic
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 17
icite_rcr: 2.059259219290181
icite_percentile: 75.3
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Oncogenic metabolic reprogramming in breast cancer: focus on signaling pathways and mitochondrial genes.

## Abstract

Oncogenic metabolic reprogramming impacts the abundance of key metabolites that regulate signaling and epigenetics. Metabolic vulnerability in the cancer cell is evident from the Warburg effect. The research on metabolism in the progression and survival of breast cancer (BC) is under focus. Oncogenic signal activation and loss of tumor suppressor are important regulators of tumor cell metabolism. Several intrinsic and extrinsic factors contribute to metabolic reprogramming. The molecular mechanisms underpinning metabolic reprogramming in BC are extensive and only partially defined. Various signaling pathways involved in the metabolism play a significant role in the modulation of BC. Notably, PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway, lactate-ERK/STAT3 signaling, loss of the tumor suppressor Ras, Myc, oxidative stress, activation of the cellular hypoxic response and acidosis contribute to different metabolic reprogramming phenotypes linked to enhanced glycolysis. The alterations in mitochondrial genes have also been elaborated upon along with their functional implications. The outcome of these active research areas might contribute to the development of novel therapeutic interventions and the remodeling of known drugs.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
