---
pmid: '37199299'
doi: 10.1615/CritRevOncog.2022043814
pmcid: ''
title: 'CRISPR/Cas9: A Molecular Tool for Ovarian Cancer Management beyond Gene Editing.'
authors:
- Dholariya Sagar
- Parchwani Deepak
- Radadiya Madhuri
- Singh Ragini D
- Sonagra Amit
- Patel Digishaben
- Sharma Gaurav
journal: Critical reviews in oncogenesis
year: 2022
month: null
volume: '27'
issue: '4'
pages: 1-22
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 3
mesh_terms:
- Female
- Humans
- Gene Editing
- CRISPR-Cas Systems
- Ovarian Neoplasms
- Genetic Therapy
- Carcinogenesis
pub_types:
- Review
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- crispr
cancer_types:
- ovarian
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- platinum
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: CRISPR and Genetic Engineering
diseases_annotated:
- Ovarian Cancer
- Ovarian cancer
- cancer
- carcinogenesis
- malignancy
- metastases
- ovarian cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 2
icite_rcr: 0.16641527166780745
icite_percentile: 8.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# CRISPR/Cas9: A Molecular Tool for Ovarian Cancer Management beyond Gene Editing.

## Abstract

Ovarian cancer manifests with early metastases and has an adverse outcome, impacting the health of women globally. Currently, this malignancy is often treated with cytoreductive surgery and platinum-based chemotherapy. This treatment option has a limited success rate due to tumor recurrence and chemoresistance. Consequently, the fundamental objective of ovarian cancer treatment is the development of novel treatment approaches. As a new robust tool, the CRISPR/Cas9 gene-editing system has shown immense promise in elucidating the molecular basis of all the facets of ovarian cancer. Due to the precise gene editing capabilities of CRISPR-Cas9, researchers have been able to conduct a more comprehensive investigation of the genesis of ovarian cancer. This gained knowledge can be translated into the development of novel diagnostic approaches and newer therapeutic targets for this dreadful malignancy. There is encouraging preclinical evidence that suggests that CRISPR/Cas9 is a powerful versatile tool for selectively targeting cancer cells and inhibiting tumor growth, establishing new signaling pathways involved in carcinogenesis, and verifying biomolecules as druggable targets. In this review, we analyzed the current research and progress made using CRISPR/Cas9-based engineering strategies in the diagnosis and treatment, as well as the challenges in bringing this method to clinics. This comprehensive analysis will lay the basis for subsequent research in the future for the treatment of ovarian cancer.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
