---
pmid: '37200049'
doi: 10.1021/acsnano.2c11964
pmcid: ''
title: Paraptosis Inducer to Effectively Trigger Immunogenic Cell Death for Metastatic
  Tumor Immunotherapy with IDO Inhibition.
authors:
- Zheng Rong-Rong
- Zhao Lin-Ping
- Huang Chu-Yu
- Cheng Hong
- Yang Ni
- Chen Zu-Xiao
- Cai Hua
- Zhang Wei
- Kong Ren-Jiang
- Li Shi-Ying
journal: ACS nano
year: 2023
month: 6
volume: '17'
issue: '11'
pages: 9972-9986
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 73
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Immunogenic Cell Death
- Neoplasms
- Drug Carriers
- Enzyme Inhibitors
- Immunotherapy
- Tumor Microenvironment
- Cell Line, Tumor
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes:
- IDO
- indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase
drugs:
- Cu2+
- GSH
- MR
- NLG919
- copper
- morusin
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Autophagy in Disease and Therapy
diseases_annotated:
- ICD
- Immunogenic Cell Death
- Metastatic Tumor
- Paraptosis
- immunogenic cell death
- paraptosis
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 55
icite_rcr: 4.579596998129201
icite_percentile: 91.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Paraptosis Inducer to Effectively Trigger Immunogenic Cell Death for Metastatic Tumor Immunotherapy with IDO Inhibition.

## Abstract

Paraptosis is characterized by the extensive vacuolization of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondria, which will cause the release of damage-associated molecular patterns to promote immunogenic cell death (ICD). However, the tumor can develop an immunosuppressive microenvironment to affect the ICD activation for the purpose of immune escape. Herein, a paraptosis inducer (CMN) is constructed to amplify the ICD effect for efficient immunotherapy by inhibiting the activity of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO). Initially, CMN is prepared by the assembly of copper ions (Cu2+), morusin (MR), and IDO inhibitor (NLG919) through noncovalent interactions. Without the need for extra drug carriers, CMN possesses very high drug contents and exhibits a favorable GSH responsiveness for disassembly. Subsequently, the released MR can trigger paraptosis to cause extensive vacuolization of ER and mitochondria, contributing to activating ICD for immunotherapy. Moreover, NLG919 would inhibit IDO to remodel the tumor microenvironment and promote the activation of cytotoxic T cells, leading to an intensive antitumor immunity. Abundant in vivo studies indicate that CMN is superior in suppressing the proliferations of not only primary tumor but also metastatic and rechallenged tumors. Such a GSH-responsive paraptosis inducer might provide a promising strategy to trigger ICD and enhance tumor immunotherapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
