---
pmid: '37210343'
doi: 10.1016/j.euo.2023.04.007
pmcid: ''
title: 'Prostate Imaging after Focal Ablation (PI-FAB): A Proposal for a Scoring System
  for Multiparametric MRI of the Prostate After Focal Therapy.'
authors:
- Giganti Francesco
- Dickinson Louise
- Orczyk Clément
- Haider Aiman
- Freeman Alex
- Emberton Mark
- Allen Clare
- Moore Caroline M
journal: European urology oncology
year: 2023
month: 12
volume: '6'
issue: '6'
pages: 629-634
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: http://euoncology.europeanurology.com/article/S2588931123000834/pdf
cited_by_count: 64
mesh_terms:
- Male
- Humans
- Multiparametric Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Prostate
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Prostatic Neoplasms
- Diffusion Magnetic Resonance Imaging
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms: []
cancer_types:
- prostate
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Prostate Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment
diseases_annotated:
- FAB
- prostate cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 57
icite_rcr: 9.301038095282584
icite_percentile: 97.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.95
icite_enriched: true
---

# Prostate Imaging after Focal Ablation (PI-FAB): A Proposal for a Scoring System for Multiparametric MRI of the Prostate After Focal Therapy.

## Abstract

At present there is no standardised system for scoring the appearance of the prostate on multiparametric magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) after focal ablation for localised prostate cancer. We propose a novel scoring system, the Prostate Imaging after Focal Ablation (PI-FAB) score, to fill this gap. PI-FAB involves a 3-point scale for rating MRI sequences in sequential order: (1) dynamic contrast-enhanced sequences; (2) diffusion-weighted imaging, split into assessment of the high-b-value sequence first and then the apparent diffusion coefficient map; and (3) T2-weighted imaging. It is essential that the pretreatment scan is also available to help with this assessment. We designed PI-FAB using our experience of reading postablation scans over the past 15 years and include details for four representative patients initially treated with high-intensity focus ultrasound at our institution to demonstrate the scoring system. We propose PI-FAB as a standardised method for evaluating prostate MRI scans after treatment with focal ablation. The next step is to evaluate its performance across multiple experienced readers of MRI after focal therapy in a clinical data set. PATIENT SUMMARY: We propose a scoring system called PI-FAB for assessing the appearance of magnetic resonance imaging scans of the prostate after focal treatment for localised prostate cancer. This will help clinicians in deciding on further follow-up.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
