---
pmid: '37257818'
doi: 10.1016/j.nbt.2023.05.007
pmcid: ''
title: Genetic code expansion in E. coli enables production of a functional 'ready-to-click'
  T cell receptor-specific scFv.
authors:
- Pasupuleti Rajeev
- Rosato Francesca
- Kolanovic Dajana
- Makshakova Olga N
- Römer Winfried
- Wiltschi Birgit
journal: New biotechnology
year: 2023
month: 9
volume: '76'
issue: ''
pages: 127-137
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbt.2023.05.007
cited_by_count: 7
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Mice
- Muromonab-CD3
- Escherichia coli
- Azides
- Receptors, Antigen, T-Cell
- Neoplasms
- Genetic Code
- Immunoconjugates
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- antibody-drug-conjugate
- bispecific-antibody
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- AzK
- Nepsilon-((2-azidoethoxy)carbonyl)-L-lysine
- OKT3
- Orthoclone
- alkyne
- azide
- copper
- fluorophore
- muromonab
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Monoclonal and Polyclonal Antibodies Research
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- cancers
- tumour
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 5
icite_rcr: 0.6903188605077913
icite_percentile: 37.1
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Genetic code expansion in E. coli enables production of a functional 'ready-to-click' T cell receptor-specific scFv.

## Abstract

Antibody-based cancer therapies have been evolving at a rapid pace in the pharmaceutical market. Bispecific antibody-drug conjugates that engage immune cells to target and kill cancer cells with precision have inspired the development of immunotherapy. Miniaturized antibody fragments such as diabodies, nanobodies, or single-chain variable fragments (scFvs) hold great promise as antibody-drug conjugates as they specifically target tumor tissue and can penetrate it. Here, we optimized the soluble periplasmic expression of the scFv OKT3 comprising the variable VH and VL domains of the mouse anti-human CD3 antibody muromonab-CD3 (trade name Orthoclone OKT3) in E. coli. By an expansion of the genetic code, we site-specifically incorporated the reactive non-canonical amino acid Nε-((2-azidoethoxy)carbonyl)-L-lysine (AzK) into scFv OKT3 using an orthogonal pyrrolysyl-tRNA synthetase/tRNACUA pair. To confirm the AzK incorporation and to demonstrate the accessibility of the reactive azide group, we conjugated a fluorophore to scFv OKT3 AzK variants by copper-free strain-promoted alkyne-azide cycloaddition ('click chemistry'). The scFv OKT3 wild type and the AzK variants bound T cells at nanomolar concentrations. In this study, a 'ready-to-click' scFv OKT3 was successfully developed for future applications, e.g. as controlled anti-T cell antibody-drug conjugate or bispecific T cell engager and for imaging immune T cell migration in cancers.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
