---
pmid: '37308581'
doi: 10.1038/s41573-023-00709-2
pmcid: ''
title: Antibody-drug conjugates come of age in oncology.
authors:
- Dumontet Charles
- Reichert Janice M
- Senter Peter D
- Lambert John M
- Beck Alain
journal: Nature reviews. Drug discovery
year: 2023
month: 8
volume: '22'
issue: '8'
pages: 641-661
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 704
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Immunoconjugates
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Neoplasms
- Antibodies, Monoclonal
- Tumor Microenvironment
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- antibody-drug-conjugate
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: HER2/EGFR in Cancer Research
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- toxicities
- toxicity
- tumour
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 591
icite_rcr: 59.885179501992255
icite_percentile: 100.0
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.95
icite_enriched: true
---

# Antibody-drug conjugates come of age in oncology.

## Abstract

Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) combine the specificity of monoclonal antibodies with the potency of highly cytotoxic agents, potentially reducing the severity of side effects by preferentially targeting their payload to the tumour site. ADCs are being increasingly used in combination with other agents, including as first-line cancer therapies. As the technology to produce these complex therapeutics has matured, many more ADCs have been approved or are in late-phase clinical trials. The diversification of antigenic targets as well as bioactive payloads is rapidly broadening the scope of tumour indications for ADCs. Moreover, novel vector protein formats as well as warheads targeting the tumour microenvironment are expected to improve the intratumour distribution or activation of ADCs, and consequently their anticancer activity for difficult-to-treat tumour types. However, toxicity remains a key issue in the development of these agents, and better understanding and management of ADC-related toxicities will be essential for further optimization. This Review provides a broad overview of the recent advances and challenges in ADC development for cancer treatment.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
