---
pmid: '37323087'
doi: 10.1002/smll.202303195
pmcid: ''
title: Inorganic Sonosensitizers for Sonodynamic Therapy in Cancer Treatment.
authors:
- Cao Xianshuo
- Li Minxing
- Liu Qiyu
- Zhao Jingjing
- Lu Xihong
- Wang Jianwei
journal: Small (Weinheim an der Bergstrasse, Germany)
year: 2023
month: 10
volume: '19'
issue: '42'
pages: e2303195
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 130
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Neoplasms
- Ultrasonic Therapy
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Theranostic Nanomedicine
- Nanomedicine
- Reactive Oxygen Species
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
- sonodynamic
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- Inorganic
- carbon
- inorganic
- metal
- noble metal
- reactive oxygen species
- silicon
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 92
icite_rcr: 10.687102441431788
icite_percentile: 98.0
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Inorganic Sonosensitizers for Sonodynamic Therapy in Cancer Treatment.

## Abstract

The rapid development of nanomedicine and nanobiotechnology has allowed the emergence of various therapeutic modalities with excellent therapeutic efficiency and biosafety, among which, the sonodynamic therapy (SDT), a combination of low-intensity ultrasound and sonosensitizers, is emerging as a promising noninvasive treatment modality for cancer treatment due to its deeper penetration, good patient compliance, and minimal damage to normal tissue. The sonosensitizers are indispensable components in the SDT process because their structure and physicochemical properties are decisive for therapeutic efficacy. Compared to the conventional and mostly studied organic sonosensitizers, inorganic sonosensitizers (noble metal-based, transition metal-based, carbon-based, and silicon-based sonosensitizers) display excellent stability, controllable morphology, and multifunctionality, which greatly expand their application in SDT. In this review, the possible mechanisms of SDT including the cavitation effect and reactive oxygen species generation are briefly discussed. Then, the recent advances in inorganic sonosensitizers are systematically summarized and their formulations and antitumor effects, particularly highlighting the strategies for optimizing the therapeutic efficiency, are outlined. The challenges and future perspectives for developing state-of-the-art sonosensitizers are also discussed. It is expected that this review will shed some light on future screening of decent inorganic sonosensitizers for SDT.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
