---
pmid: '37348864'
doi: 10.1093/jnci/djad118
pmcid: PMC10637035
title: Radiation dose, schedule, and novel systemic targets for radio-immunotherapy
  combinations.
authors:
- Karapetyan Lilit
- Iheagwara Uzoma K
- Olson Adam C
- Chmura Steven J
- Skinner Heath K
- Luke Jason J
journal: Journal of the National Cancer Institute
year: 2023
month: 11
volume: '115'
issue: '11'
pages: 1278-1293
is_oa: true
oa_status: bronze
oa_url: https://academic.oup.com/jnci/advance-article-pdf/doi/10.1093/jnci/djad118/50969962/djad118.pdf
cited_by_count: 23
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Radioimmunotherapy
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Neoplasms
- Immunotherapy
- Radiation Dosage
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- CD8
- CSF-1
- CTLA4
- PD1
- TGF- beta
- colony-stimulating-factor-1
- transforming-growth factor-beta
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer Immunotherapy and Biomarkers
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- cancers
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 16
icite_rcr: 1.2173042870593176
icite_percentile: 57.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Radiation dose, schedule, and novel systemic targets for radio-immunotherapy combinations.

## Abstract

Immunotherapy combinations are being investigated to expand the benefit of immune checkpoint blockade across many cancer types. Radiation combinations, in particular using stereotactic body radiotherapy, are of keen interest because of underlying mechanistic rationale, safety, and availability as a standard of care in certain cancers. In addition to direct tumor cytotoxicity, radiation therapy has immunomodulatory effects such as induction of immunogenic cell death, enhancement of antigen presentation, and expansion of the T-cell receptor repertoire as well as recruitment and increased activity of tumor-specific effector CD8+ cells. Combinations of radiation with cytokines and/or chemokines and anti-programmed death 1 and anticytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 therapies have demonstrated safety and feasibility, as well as the potential to improve long-term outcomes and possibly induce out of irradiated field or abscopal responses. Novel immunoradiotherapy combinations represent a promising therapeutic approach to overcome radioresistance and further enhance systemic immunotherapy. Potential benefits include reversing CD8+ T-cell exhaustion, inhibiting myeloid-derived suppressor cells, and reversing M2 macrophage polarization as well as decreasing levels of colony-stimulating factor-1 and transforming growth factor-β. Here, we discuss current data and mechanistic rationale for combining novel immunotherapy agents with radiation therapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
