---
pmid: '37363954'
doi: 10.1002/adhm.202300935
pmcid: ''
title: Black Phosphorus Nanosheets Assist Nanoerythrosomes for Efficient mRNA Vaccine
  Delivery and Immune Activation.
authors:
- Yang Lixin
- Wang Tengqi
- Zhang Dexin
- Huang Xin
- Dong Yuqin
- Gao Wen
- Ye Youqing
- Ren Ke
- Zhao Wei
- Qiao Haishi
- Jia Lizhou
journal: Advanced healthcare materials
year: 2023
month: 10
volume: '12'
issue: '26'
pages: e2300935
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 26
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Mice
- Phosphorus
- RNA, Messenger
- Drug Delivery Systems
- Melanoma
- Antigens, Neoplasm
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- mRNA-vaccine
cancer_types:
- melanoma
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs:
- BPmRNA
- Black Phosphorus
- PEI
- black phosphorus
- polyethyleneimine
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: RNA Interference and Gene Delivery
diseases_annotated:
- infectious disease
- melanoma
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 20
icite_rcr: 2.527208626744384
icite_percentile: 80.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Black Phosphorus Nanosheets Assist Nanoerythrosomes for Efficient mRNA Vaccine Delivery and Immune Activation.

## Abstract

Messenger RNA (mRNA)-based vaccines have enormous potential in infectious disease prevention and tumor neoantigen application. However, developing an advanced delivery system for efficient mRNA delivery and intracellular release for protein translation remains a challenge. Herein, a biocompatible biomimetic system is designed using red blood cell-derived nanoerythrosomes (NER) and black phosphorus nanosheets (BP) for mRNA delivery. BP is covalently modified with polyethyleneimine (PEI), serving as a core to efficiently condense mRNA via electrostatic interactions. To facilitate the spleen targeting of the mRNA-loaded BP (BPmRNA ), NER is co-extruded with BPmRNA to construct a stable "core-shell" nanovaccine (NER@BPmRNA ). The mRNA nanovaccine exhibits efficient protein expression and immune activation via BP-mediated adjuvant effect and enhanced lysosomal escape. In vivo evaluation demonstrates that the system delivery of mRNA encoding coronavirus receptor-binding domain (RBD) significantly increases the antibody titer and pseudovirus neutralization effect compared with that of NER without BP assistance. Furthermore, the mRNA extracted from mouse melanoma tissues is utilized to simulate tumor neoantigen delivered by NER@BPmRNA . In the vaccinated mice, BP-assisted NER for the delivery of melanoma mRNA can induce more antibodies that specifically recognize tumor antigens. Thus, BP-assisted NER can serve as a safe and effective delivery vehicle in mRNA-based therapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
