---
pmid: '37384818'
doi: 10.1002/adma.202303835
pmcid: ''
title: Extracellular Vesicles-Derived Hybrid Nanoplatforms for Amplified CD47 Blockade-Based
  Cancer Immunotherapy.
authors:
- Tang Lu
- Yin Yue
- Cao Yuqi
- Fu Cong
- Liu Hening
- Feng Jingwen
- Wang Wei
- Liang Xing-Jie
journal: Advanced materials (Deerfield Beach, Fla.)
year: 2023
month: 9
volume: '35'
issue: '35'
pages: e2303835
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 139
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- CD47 Antigen
- Neoplasm Recurrence, Local
- Phagocytosis
- Neoplasms
- Immunotherapy
- Extracellular Vesicles
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- nanoparticle
cancer_types:
- breast
- melanoma
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- CD47
- SIRPalpha
- signal regulatory protein alpha
drugs:
- IR820
- SPI@hEL-RS17
- polymetformin
- shikonin
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Extracellular vesicles in disease
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- TAM
- breast tumor
- lung metastasis
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 103
icite_rcr: 9.73501878690403
icite_percentile: 97.7
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Extracellular Vesicles-Derived Hybrid Nanoplatforms for Amplified CD47 Blockade-Based Cancer Immunotherapy.

## Abstract

Immunomodulation of tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) into tumor-inhibiting M1-like phenotype is a promising but challenging strategy. Cleverly, tumor cells overexpress CD47, a "don't eat me" signal that ligates with the signal regulatory protein alpha (SIRPα) on macrophages to escape phagocytosis. Thus, effective re-education of TAMs into the "eat me" type and blocking the CD47-SIRPα signaling play pivotal roles in tumor immunotherapy. Herein, it is reported that hybrid nanovesicles (hEL-RS17) derived from extracellular vesicles of M1 macrophages and decorated with RS17 peptide, an antitumor peptide that specifically binds to CD47 on tumor cells and blocks CD47-SIRPα signaling, can actively target tumor cells and remodel TAM phenotypes. Consequently, more M1-like TAMs infiltrate into tumor tissue to phagocytize more tumor cells due to CD47 blockade. By further co-encapsulating chemotherapeutic agent shikonin, photosensitizer IR820, and immunomodulator polymetformin in hEL-RS17, an enhanced antitumor effect is obtained due to the combinational treatment modality and close synergy among each component. Upon laser irradiation, the designed SPI@hEL-RS17 nanoparticles exert potent antitumor efficacy against both 4T1 breast tumor and B16F10 melanoma models, which not only suppresses primary tumor growth but also inhibits lung metastasis and prevents tumor recurrence, exhibiting great potential in boosting CD47 blockade-based antitumor immunotherapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
