---
pmid: '37437806'
doi: 10.1016/j.prro.2023.06.006
pmcid: ''
title: Evaluation of Interfraction Setup Uncertainty of Patients With Glioblastoma
  Wearing TTFields (Tumor Treating Fields) During Radiation Therapy.
authors:
- Pan Mingyuan
- Xiao Yixuan
- Zhu Liying
- Dong Shengnan
- Liang Liping
- Sun Lei
- Shi Wenyin
- Wang Yang
journal: Practical radiation oncology
year: 2023
month: null
volume: '13'
issue: '6'
pages: 522-530
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 3
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Glioblastoma
- Uncertainty
- Radiotherapy, Image-Guided
- Radiotherapy, Intensity-Modulated
- Radiotherapy Planning, Computer-Assisted
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- ttfields
cancer_types:
- glioblastoma
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Advanced Radiotherapy Techniques
diseases_annotated:
- GBM
- Tumor
- glioblastoma
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 3
icite_rcr: 0.5545986316460234
icite_percentile: 30.2
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Evaluation of Interfraction Setup Uncertainty of Patients With Glioblastoma Wearing TTFields (Tumor Treating Fields) During Radiation Therapy.

## Abstract

**PURPOSE**: Tumor treating fields (TTFields) with concurrent radiation therapy (RT) might improve the outcome of patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma. Several trials, including that conducted in our center, have allowed patients to wear TTFields during RT. We aimed to evaluate the setup uncertainty introduced by TTFields and calculate the planning target volume (PTV) margin for clinical reference.

**METHODS AND MATERIALS**: We collected and analyzed 201 cone beam computed tomography images of 22 patients in our center. Patients with or without TTFields were divided into the control and TTFields groups. We evaluated the setup errors in 6 degrees of freedom and 3 degrees of freedom and the magnitudes in the 3-dimensional vectors. An estimated PTV margin for patients requiring nonimaging-guided RT was recommended.

**RESULTS**: A significant difference was observed in the longitudinal axis between the TTFields and control groups (P < .05). These results were consistent with that of the intragroup comparison of the TTFields group. The position error of the longitudinal axis (from head to feet) was -0.51 ± 2.05 mm in the TTFields group.

**CONCLUSIONS**: Wearing TTFields during RT increased the uncertainty, especially in the longitudinal axis, with a system error of 1.40 mm and a random error of 1.28 mm. Daily image guided RT for TTFields patients seems necessary. However, the recommended expansion margin of the PTV is 5 mm for patients requiring nonimage-guided RT to enhance the safety and efficacy of treatment.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
