---
pmid: '37475577'
doi: 10.1002/wnan.1913
pmcid: ''
title: 'Ultrasound-mediated nano-sized drug delivery systems for cancer treatment:
  Multi-scale and multi-physics computational modeling.'
authors:
- Moradi Kashkooli Farshad
- Hornsby Tyler K
- Kolios Michael C
- Tavakkoli Jahangir Jahan
journal: Wiley interdisciplinary reviews. Nanomedicine and nanobiotechnology
year: 2024
month: null
volume: '16'
issue: '1'
pages: e1913
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdfdirect/10.1002/wnan.1913
cited_by_count: 31
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Nanoparticle Drug Delivery System
- Drug Delivery Systems
- Neoplasms
- Computer Simulation
- Nanoparticles
- Physics
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: theoretical
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Ultrasound and Hyperthermia Applications
diseases_annotated:
- DDS
- Oncologic Disease
- cancer
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 14
icite_rcr: 3.922683340414011
icite_percentile: 89.8
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Ultrasound-mediated nano-sized drug delivery systems for cancer treatment: Multi-scale and multi-physics computational modeling.

## Abstract

Computational modeling enables researchers to study and understand various complex biological phenomena in anticancer drug delivery systems (DDSs), especially nano-sized DDSs (NSDDSs). The combination of NSDDSs and therapeutic ultrasound (TUS), that is, focused ultrasound and low-intensity pulsed ultrasound, has made significant progress in recent years, opening many opportunities for cancer treatment. Multiple parameters require tuning and optimization to develop effective DDSs, such as NSDDSs, in which mathematical modeling can prove advantageous. In silico computational modeling of ultrasound-responsive DDS typically involves a complex framework of acoustic interactions, heat transfer, drug release from nanoparticles, fluid flow, mass transport, and pharmacodynamic governing equations. Owing to the rapid development of computational tools, modeling the different phenomena in multi-scale complex problems involved in drug delivery to tumors has become possible. In the present study, we present an in-depth review of recent advances in the mathematical modeling of TUS-mediated DDSs for cancer treatment. A detailed discussion is also provided on applying these computational models to improve the clinical translation for applications in cancer treatment. This article is categorized under: Nanotechnology Approaches to Biology > Nanoscale Systems in Biology Therapeutic Approaches and Drug Discovery > Nanomedicine for Oncologic Disease.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
