---
pmid: '37542858'
doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2023.122252
pmcid: ''
title: Ultrasound-activated nanosonosensitizer for oxygen/sulfate dual-radical nanotherapy.
authors:
- Qiao Xiaohui
- Liang Jing
- Qiu Luping
- Feng Wei
- Cheng Guangwen
- Chen Yu
- Ding Hong
journal: Biomaterials
year: 2023
month: 10
volume: '301'
issue: ''
pages: '122252'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 25
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Reactive Oxygen Species
- Oxygen
- Neoplasms
- Sulfates
- Cell Line, Tumor
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- sonodynamic
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invitro
genes: []
drugs:
- O2
- PHM
- PHMP
- PMS
- Pd
- ROS
- SO4-
- mesoporous titanium dioxide
- oxygen
- peroxymonosulfate
- reactive oxygen species
- sulfate
- sulfate radical
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- cancers
- drug abuse
- infected wound
- infection
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 18
icite_rcr: 2.1382988723676934
icite_percentile: 76.4
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Ultrasound-activated nanosonosensitizer for oxygen/sulfate dual-radical nanotherapy.

## Abstract

An all-in-one therapy for cooperatively fighting cancer, infection and boosting wound repair is exceedingly demanded for patients with advanced superficial cancers or after surgical intervention to avoid multiple drug abuse and resultant adverse effects. Here, the ultrasound-activated nanosonosensitizer PHMP that integrated peroxymonosulfate (PMS) into the Pd-catalyzed hydrogenated mesoporous titanium dioxide (PHM) was dexterously designed for combined therapy of cancer and infected wound based on oxygen/sulfate dual-radical nanotherapy. Firstly, the PHM with single crystal structure and abundant oxygen deficiencies exhibited excellent ultrasound-excited reactive oxygen species (ROS) production for enhanced sonodynamic therapy (SDT) under the support of Pd nanozyme-mediated O2 supply. Simultaneously, the physically targeted ultrasound irradiation effectively transformed PMS loaded in the hollow cavities into distinct sulfate radical (•SO4-) with longer half-life and stronger oxidation, which remarkably enhanced the therapeutic efficacy of PHM-mediated SDT for cancer and bacteria. In addition, by embedding PHMP into the hydrogel, the enrichment of PHMP in the focal site was guaranteed, and meanwhile a moist and ventilated environment was created to speed up wound repair. The study broadens the potential of •SO4- in the therapeutic fields and contributes a simple and appealing tactic for the comprehensive treatment of cancer, infection and wound repair.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
