---
pmid: '37598011'
doi: 10.1016/j.cytogfr.2023.08.002
pmcid: ''
title: Tumor microenvironment, histone modifications, and myeloid-derived suppressor
  cells.
authors:
- Tian Xinyu
- Wang Ting
- Shen Han
- Wang Shengjun
journal: Cytokine & growth factor reviews
year: 2023
month: 12
volume: '74'
issue: ''
pages: 108-121
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 24
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Myeloid-Derived Suppressor Cells
- Histone Code
- Tumor Microenvironment
- Protein Processing, Post-Translational
- Immunosuppression Therapy
- Neoplasms
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms: []
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Immune cells in cancer
diseases_annotated:
- Tumor
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 21
icite_rcr: 2.1383238819084167
icite_percentile: 76.4
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Tumor microenvironment, histone modifications, and myeloid-derived suppressor cells.

## Abstract

Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) are important components of the tumor microenvironment (TME), which drive the tumor immune escape by inducing immunosuppression. The expansion and function of MDSCs are tightly associated with signaling pathways induced by molecules from tumor cells, stromal cells, and activated immune cells in the TME. Although these pathways have been well-characterized, the understanding of the epigenetic regulators involved is incomplete. Since histone modifications are the most studied epigenetic changes in MDSCs, we summarize current knowledge on the role of histone modifications in MDSCs within this review. We first discuss the influence of the TME on histone modifications in MDSCs, with an emphasis on histone modifications and modifiers that direct MDSC differentiation and function. Furthermore, we highlight current epigenetic interventions that can reverse MDSC-induced immunosuppression by modulating histone modifications and discuss future research directions to fully appreciate the role of histone modifications in MDSCs.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
