---
pmid: '37712920'
doi: 10.1002/marc.202300496
pmcid: ''
title: Semiconducting Polymers for Cancer Immunotherapy.
authors:
- Li Wen
- Liang Mengyun
- Qi Ji
- Ding Dan
journal: Macromolecular rapid communications
year: 2023
month: 12
volume: '44'
issue: '23'
pages: e2300496
is_oa: true
oa_status: bronze
oa_url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdfdirect/10.1002/marc.202300496
cited_by_count: 7
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Phototherapy
- Nanoparticles
- Polymers
- Neoplasms
- Immunotherapy
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- nanoparticle
- sonodynamic
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- SP
- Semiconducting
- polymer
- semiconducting
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- cancer
- irAEs
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 6
icite_rcr: 0.5743235676753634
icite_percentile: 31.3
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Semiconducting Polymers for Cancer Immunotherapy.

## Abstract

As a monumental breakthrough in cancer treatment, immunotherapy has attracted tremendous attention in recent years. However, one challenge faced by immunotherapy is the low response rate and the immune-related adverse events (irAEs). Therefore, it is important to explore new therapeutic strategies and platforms for boosting therapeutic benefits and decreasing the side effects of immunotherapy. In recent years, semiconducting polymer (SP), a category of organic materials with π-conjugated aromatic backbone, has been attracting considerable attention because of their outstanding characteristics such as excellent photophysical features, good biosafety, adjustable chemical flexibility, easy fabrication, and high stability. With these distinct advantages, SP is extensively explored for bioimaging and photo- or ultrasound-activated tumor therapy. Here, the recent advancements in SP-based nanomedicines are summarized for enhanced tumor immunotherapy. According to the photophysical properties of SPs, the cancer immunotherapies enabled by SPs with the photothermal, photodynamic, or sonodynamic functions are highlighted in detail, with a particular focus on the construction of combination immunotherapy and activatable nanoplatforms to maximize the benefits of cancer immunotherapy. Herein, new guidance and comprehensive insights are provided for the design of SPs with desired photophysical properties to realize maximized effectiveness of required biomedical applications.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
