---
pmid: '37737443'
doi: 10.1007/s12010-023-04708-2
pmcid: ''
title: 'CRISPR-Based Gene Editing: a Modern Approach for Study and Treatment of Cancer.'
authors:
- Talukder Pratik
- Chanda Sounak
- Chaudhuri Biswadeep
- Choudhury Sonjoy Roy
- Saha Debanjan
- Dash Sudipta
- Banerjee Abhineet
- Chatterjee Bhaskarjyaa
journal: Applied biochemistry and biotechnology
year: 2024
month: 7
volume: '196'
issue: '7'
pages: 4439-4456
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12010-023-04708-2
cited_by_count: 1
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Gene Editing
- Neoplasms
- CRISPR-Cas Systems
- Animals
- Genetic Therapy
- Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- crispr
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: CRISPR and Genetic Engineering
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 1
icite_rcr: 0.7718395175933505
icite_percentile: 40.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# CRISPR-Based Gene Editing: a Modern Approach for Study and Treatment of Cancer.

## Abstract

The development and emergence of clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) as a genome-editing technology have created a plethora of opportunities in genetic engineering. The ability of sequence-specific addition or removal of DNA in an efficient and cost-effective manner has revolutionized modern research in the field of life science and healthcare. CRISPR is widely used as a genome engineering tool in clinical studies for observing gene expression and metabolic pathway regulations in detail. Even in the case of transgenic research and personalized gene manipulation studies, CRISPR-based technology is used extensively. To understand and even to correct the underlying genetic problem is of cancer, CRISPR-based technology can be used. Various kinds of work is going on throughout the world which are attempting to target different genes in order to discover novel and effective methodologies for the treatment of cancer. In this review, we provide a brief overview on the application of CRISPR gene editing technology in cancer treatment focusing on the key aspects of cancer screening, modelling and therapy techniques.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
