---
pmid: '37781991'
doi: 10.1080/14737140.2023.2265570
pmcid: ''
title: '2023 ASCO Genitourinary Cancers Symposium: a focus on urothelial carcinoma.'
authors:
- Cigliola Antonio
- Beccia Viria
- Anghelone Annunziato
- Panebianco Martina
- Ciccarese Chiara
- Iacovelli Roberto
journal: Expert review of anticancer therapy
year: 2023
month: null
volume: '23'
issue: '11'
pages: 1123-1126
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 2
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Urinary Bladder Neoplasms
- Carcinoma, Transitional Cell
- Nivolumab
- Adjuvants, Immunologic
- Progression-Free Survival
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- antibody-drug-conjugate
- immunotherapy
cancer_types:
- bladder
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- KEYNOTE-057
- PT
- atezolizumab
- nivolumab
- pembrolizumab
- platinum
- sacituzumab govitecan
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Bladder and Urothelial Cancer Treatments
diseases_annotated:
- Cancers
- UC
- bladder cancer
- mUC
- muscle-invasive urothelial carcinoma
- urothelial carcinoma
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 2
icite_rcr: 0.16121692337050564
icite_percentile: 8.2
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# 2023 ASCO Genitourinary Cancers Symposium: a focus on urothelial carcinoma.

## Abstract

In this article, we describe the main acquisitions of urothelial carcinoma (UC) management reported at the 2023 American Society of Clinical Oncology Genitourinary Cancers Symposium. A major development of this year was characterized by the confirmation of a disease-free survival advantage of adjuvant nivolumab for high-risk muscle-invasive urothelial carcinoma after radical resection at longer follow-up. In the metastatic setting, the updated analysis of the IMvigor130 study confirmed the failure of the strategy of adding immunotherapy (i.e. atezolizumab) to first-line chemotherapy; analogously atezolizumab monotherapy did not improve overall survival compared to chemotherapy in untreated metastatic urothelial carcinoma (mUC). Furthermore, interesting data were presented concerning future treatment options. In particular, immunotherapy (IO) with pembrolizumab showed promising activity in patients with high-risk non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer unresponsive to bacillus Calmette-Guérin (KEYNOTE-057). The antibody-drug conjugate sacituzumab govitecan demonstrated a relevant activity in platinum (PT)-ineligible mUC patients progressed after prior IO. Certainly, the lack of predictive biomarkers of response to a specific therapy highlights the urgent need for comprehensive characterization of UC for a personalized therapeutic approach that will improve patient outcomes.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
