---
pmid: '37840374'
doi: 10.1002/smtd.202301134
pmcid: ''
title: Piezoelectric Ba0.85 Sr0.15 TiO3 Nanosonosensitizer with Nitric Oxide Delivery
  for Boosting Cancer Therapy.
authors:
- Zhao Yunchao
- Wang Shaobo
- Yao Shuncheng
- Wan Xingyi
- Hu Quanhong
- Zheng Minjia
- Wang Zhuo
- Li Linlin
journal: Small methods
year: 2024
month: 1
volume: '8'
issue: '1'
pages: e2301134
is_oa: true
oa_status: bronze
oa_url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdfdirect/10.1002/smtd.202301134
cited_by_count: 29
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Mice
- Strontium
- Nitric Oxide
- Reactive Oxygen Species
- Linoleic Acid
- Oxygen
- Neoplasms
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
- sonodynamic
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs:
- ABO3
- BST
- BST@LA
- L-arginine
- Nitric Oxide
- O2 -
- ROS
- hydroxyl radical
- nitric oxide
- oxygen
- reactive oxygen species
- strontium (Sr) doped barium titanate
- superoxide anion
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 18
icite_rcr: 3.7704882764059158
icite_percentile: 89.1
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Piezoelectric Ba0.85 Sr0.15 TiO3 Nanosonosensitizer with Nitric Oxide Delivery for Boosting Cancer Therapy.

## Abstract

The efficacy of sonodynamic therapy (SDT) mainly relies on the sonosensitizers, which generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) upon ultrasound (US) stimulation. However, the limited availability of high-efficiency sonosensitizers hampers the therapeutic effectiveness of SDT as a standalone modality. In this work, a robust sonodynamic and gas cancer therapeutic platform is constructed based on strontium (Sr) doped barium titanate (BST) piezoelectric nanoparticles functionalized with L-arginine (BST@LA). The doping of Sr into A site of the ABO3 piezoelectric nanocrystals not only introduces oxygen vacancies into the nanoparticles and enhance the intrinsic piezoelectricity, but also narrows the semiconductor band gap and enhances charge carrier migration, all of which facilitate the sonodynamic production of superoxide anion (•O2 - ) and hydroxyl radical (•OH). In addition, the generated ROS promotes the decomposition of the surface-tethered LA, enabling the controlled release of nitric oxide (NO) gas at the tumor site, thereby achieving a combination therapeutic effect. In vivo experiments exhibit remarkable tumor suppression rate (89.5%) in 4T1 tumor mice model, demonstrating the effectiveness of this strategy. The ion doping and oxygen vacancy engineering to improve sonosensitizers, along with the synergistic combination of sonodynamic and gas therapy, provides promising avenues for improving cancer therapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
