---
pmid: '37898045'
doi: 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2023.113606
pmcid: ''
title: Ultrasmall iron-doped zinc oxide nanoparticles for ferroptosis assisted sono-chemodynamic
  cancer therapy.
authors:
- Yu Jing
- Zhu Fangyin
- Yang Ya
- Zhang Peixia
- Zheng Yilin
- Chen Haijun
- Gao Yu
journal: Colloids and surfaces. B, Biointerfaces
year: 2023
month: 12
volume: '232'
issue: ''
pages: '113606'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 16
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Mice
- Ferroptosis
- Zinc Oxide
- Nanoparticles
- Zinc
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Iron
- Neoplasms
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
- sonodynamic
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs:
- 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane
- FZO
- FZO-ASP
- Inorganic
- iron
- polyethylene glycol 600
- zinc oxide
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- breast tumor
- cancer
- toxicity
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 9
icite_rcr: 1.077583866385094
icite_percentile: 53.0
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Ultrasmall iron-doped zinc oxide nanoparticles for ferroptosis assisted sono-chemodynamic cancer therapy.

## Abstract

The efficacy and biosafety of sonodynamic therapy (SDT) are closely related to the properties of sonosensitizers. Inorganic sonosensitizers with high chemical stability and low dark toxicity are generally limited by slow metabolism and accumulation in vivo. Combined treatment strategies by inducing more redox imbalance are expected to improve the efficacy of sonodynamic antitumor therapy. Herein, we report the development of ultra-small iron-doped zinc oxide nanoparticles (FZO NPs) to achieve synergistic sono-chemodynamic therapy and low accumulation in vivo. The surface of FZO NPs with diameter of 5 nm was modified with 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane and polyethylene glycol 600 to obtain FZO-ASP with good aqueous stability. FZO-ASP with iron doping could trigger Fenton reaction and induce ferroptosis in cancer cells. With the assistance of ultrasonic energy, FZO-ASP demonstrated enhanced inhibitory effects on proliferation of various cancer cells and murine breast tumor growth than undoped counterpart. In addition, FZO-ASP injected intravenously could be effectively excreted in vivo and showed no obvious cumulative toxicity to the treated mice. Hence, this type of ultra-small iron-doped zinc oxide nanoparticles could serve as a safe and efficient sonosensitizer agent for synergistic sono-chemodynamic cancer therapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
