---
pmid: '37890990'
doi: 10.1136/jcp-2023-209005
pmcid: PMC11450735
title: 'Alternative lengthening of telomeres: mechanism and the pathogenesis of cancer.'
authors:
- Mori Joakin O
- Keegan Joshua
- Flynn Rachel L
- Heaphy Christopher M
journal: Journal of clinical pathology
year: 2024
month: 1
volume: '77'
issue: '2'
pages: 82-86
is_oa: true
oa_status: green
oa_url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11450735/pdf/nihms-2023742.pdf
cited_by_count: 26
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Telomere Homeostasis
- X-linked Nuclear Protein
- Telomerase
- Telomere
- Neoplasms
- DNA Helicases
- Carrier Proteins
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- synthetic-lethality
cancer_types:
- liver
- neuroblastoma
- sarcoma
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- ATRX
- DAXX
- H3F3A
- SLX4IP
- SMARCAL1
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Telomeres, Telomerase, and Senescence
diseases_annotated:
- ALT-positive cancers
- WHO grade II-IV
- astrocytoma
- cancer
- cancers
- hepatocellular carcinomas
- lengthening of telomeres
- neuroblastoma
- pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours
- sarcomas
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 21
icite_rcr: 3.9711104600030915
icite_percentile: 90.0
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Alternative lengthening of telomeres: mechanism and the pathogenesis of cancer.

## Abstract

Telomere maintenance and elongation allows cells to gain replicative immortality and evade cellular senescence during cancer development. While most cancers use telomerase to maintain telomere lengths, a subset of cancers engage the alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT) pathway for telomere maintenance. ALT is present in 5%-10% of all cancers, although the prevalence is dramatically higher in certain cancer types, including complex karyotype sarcomas, isocitrate dehydrogenase-mutant astrocytoma (WHO grade II-IV), pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours, neuroblastoma and chromophobe hepatocellular carcinomas. ALT is maintained through a homology-directed DNA repair mechanism. Resembling break-induced replication, this aberrant process results in dramatic cell-to-cell telomere length heterogeneity, widespread chromosomal instability and chronic replication stress. Additionally, ALT-positive cancers frequently harbour inactivating mutations in either chromatin remodelling proteins (ATRX, DAXX and H3F3A) or DNA damage repair factors (SMARCAL1 and SLX4IP). ALT can readily be detected in tissue by assessing the presence of unique molecular characteristics, such as large ultrabright nuclear telomeric foci or partially single-stranded telomeric DNA circles (C-circles). Importantly, ALT has been validated as a robust diagnostic and prognostic biomarker for certain cancer types and may even be exploited as a therapeutic target via small molecular inhibitors and/or synthetic lethality approaches.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
