---
pmid: '37919901'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2023.10.024
pmcid: PMC10787123
title: 'mRNA vaccines and their delivery strategies: A journey from infectious diseases
  to cancer.'
authors:
- Malla RamaRao
- Srilatha Mundla
- Farran Batoul
- Nagaraju Ganji Purnachandra
journal: 'Molecular therapy : the journal of the American Society of Gene Therapy'
year: 2024
month: 1
volume: '32'
issue: '1'
pages: 13-31
is_oa: true
oa_status: bronze
oa_url: http://www.cell.com/article/S1525001623006019/pdf
cited_by_count: 39
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- mRNA Vaccines
- Neoplasms
- Vaccines
- Antigens, Neoplasm
- Nanoparticles
- Communicable Diseases
- RNA, Messenger
- Cancer Vaccines
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- mRNA-vaccine
- nanoparticle
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- HLA
drugs:
- lipid
- polymer
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: RNA Interference and Gene Delivery
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- infectious diseases
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 29
icite_rcr: 5.329123120303281
icite_percentile: 93.7
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# mRNA vaccines and their delivery strategies: A journey from infectious diseases to cancer.

## Abstract

mRNA vaccines have evolved as promising cancer therapies. These vaccines can encode tumor-allied antigens, thus enabling personalized treatment approaches. They can also target cancer-specific mutations and overcome immune evasion mechanisms. They manipulate the body's cellular functions to produce antigens, elicit immune responses, and suppress tumors by overcoming limitations associated with specific histocompatibility leukocyte antigen molecules. However, successfully delivering mRNA into target cells destroys a crucial challenge. Viral and nonviral vectors (lipid nanoparticles and cationic liposomes) have shown great capacity in protecting mRNA from deterioration and assisting in cellular uptake. Cell-penetrating peptides, hydrogels, polymer-based nanoparticles, and dendrimers have been investigated to increase the delivery efficacy and immunogenicity of mRNA. This comprehensive review explores the landscape of mRNA vaccines and their delivery platforms for cancer, addressing design considerations, diverse delivery strategies, and recent advancements. Overall, this review contributes to the progress of mRNA vaccines as an innovative strategy for effective cancer treatment.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
