---
pmid: '37944644'
doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2023.115136
pmcid: ''
title: 'Lipid nanoparticles for targeted delivery of anticancer therapeutics: Recent
  advances in development of siRNA and lipoprotein-mimicking nanocarriers.'
authors:
- Yaghmur Anan
- Østergaard Jesper
- Mu Huiling
journal: Advanced drug delivery reviews
year: 2023
month: 12
volume: '203'
issue: ''
pages: '115136'
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2023.115136
cited_by_count: 36
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- RNA, Small Interfering
- Drug Delivery Systems
- Neoplasms
- Nanoparticles
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Lipoproteins
- Liposomes
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- Lipid
- lipid
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoparticle-Based Drug Delivery
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 27
icite_rcr: 3.21879189163531
icite_percentile: 86.3
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Lipid nanoparticles for targeted delivery of anticancer therapeutics: Recent advances in development of siRNA and lipoprotein-mimicking nanocarriers.

## Abstract

The limitations inherent in conventional cancer treatment methods have stimulated recent efforts towards the design of safe nanomedicines with high efficacy for combating cancer through various promising approaches. A plethora of nanoparticles has been introduced in the development of cancer nanomedicines. Among them, different lipid nanoparticles are attractive for use due to numerous advantages and unique opportunities, including biocompatibility and targeted drug delivery. However, a comprehensive understanding of nano-bio interactions is imperative to facilitate the translation of recent advancements in the development of cancer nanomedicines into clinical practice. In this contribution, we focus on lipoprotein-mimicking nanoparticles, which possess unique features and compositions facilitating drug transport through receptor binding mechanisms. Additionally, we describe potential applications of siRNA lipid nanoparticles in the future design of anticancer nanomedicines. Thus, this review highlights recent progress, challenges, and opportunities of lipid-based lipoprotein-mimicking nanoparticles and siRNA nanocarriers designed for the targeted delivery of anticancer therapeutic agents.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
