---
pmid: '38039777'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2023.113428
pmcid: ''
title: Atypical B cells (CD21-CD27-IgD-) correlate with lack of response to checkpoint
  inhibitor therapy in NSCLC.
authors:
- Belderbos R A
- Corneth O B J
- Dumoulin D
- Hendriks R W
- Aerts J G J V
- Willemsen M
journal: 'European journal of cancer (Oxford, England : 1990)'
year: 2024
month: 1
volume: '196'
issue: ''
pages: '113428'
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: http://www.ejcancer.com/article/S095980492300730X/pdf
cited_by_count: 17
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung
- Lung Neoplasms
- B-Lymphocytes
- Phenotype
- Mesothelioma
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types:
- lung
- mesothelioma
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- CD21
- CD27
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer Immunotherapy and Biomarkers
diseases_annotated:
- NSCLC
- infection
- mesothelioma
- non-small cell lung cancer
- thoracic malignancies
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 12
icite_rcr: 1.7971784058079558
icite_percentile: 71.1
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Atypical B cells (CD21-CD27-IgD-) correlate with lack of response to checkpoint inhibitor therapy in NSCLC.

## Abstract

**INTRODUCTION**: Checkpoint inhibitor (CI) therapy has revolutionized treatment for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, a proportion of patients do not respond to CI therapy for unknown reasons. Although the current paradigm in anti-tumor immunity evolves around T cells, the presence of tertiary lymphoid structures and memory B cells has been positively correlated with response to CI therapy in NSCLC. In addition, double negative (DN) (CD27- IgD-) B cells have been shown to be abundant in NSCLC compared to healthy lung tissue and inversely correlate with the intratumoral presence of memory B cells. Nonetheless, no study has correlated DN B cells to survival in NSCLC.

**METHODS**: In this study, we evaluated the presence and phenotype of B cells in peripheral blood with flow cytometry of patients with NSCLC and mesothelioma before receiving CI therapy and correlated these with clinical outcome.

**RESULTS**: Non-responding patients showed decreased frequencies of B cells, yet increased frequencies of antigen-experienced CD21- DN (Atypical) B cells compared to responding patients and HC, which was confirmed in patients with mesothelioma treated with CI therapy.

**CONCLUSIONS**: These data show that the frequency of CD21- DN B cells correlates with lack of response to CI therapy in thoracic malignancies. The mechanism by which CD21- DN B cells hamper CI therapy remains unknown. Our findings support the hypothesis that CD21- DN B cells resemble phenotypically identical exhausted B cells that are seen in chronic infection or function as antigen presenting cells that induce regulatory T cells.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
