---
pmid: '38038271'
doi: 10.1021/acsami.3c08071
pmcid: ''
title: Gold-Crowned Bismuth-Based Nanocomposites for Sonodynamic, Photothermal, and
  Chemotherapeutic Cancer Therapy.
authors:
- Meng Xiangrui
- Liu Jingwen
- Zheng Qiao
- Li Songtao
- Xiao Hang
- Huang Ju
- Ma Li
- Liu Yiyao
- Tang Jianyuan
journal: ACS applied materials & interfaces
year: 2023
month: 12
volume: '15'
issue: '50'
pages: 58041-58053
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 13
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Mice
- Gold
- Bismuth
- Metal Nanoparticles
- Phototherapy
- Nanoparticles
- Neoplasms
- Nanocomposites
- Cell Line, Tumor
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
- sonodynamic
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invitro
genes: []
drugs:
- BACNs
- Bismuth
- bismuth
- bufalin
- pyridine
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- cancer
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 8
icite_rcr: 1.0973258003134372
icite_percentile: 53.7
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Gold-Crowned Bismuth-Based Nanocomposites for Sonodynamic, Photothermal, and Chemotherapeutic Cancer Therapy.

## Abstract

Conventional inorganic semiconductor nanoparticles have emerged as photothermal agents in photothermal therapy and as sonosensitizers in sonodynamic therapy. However, their weak drug-loading capabilities and the deficient techniques for multifunctional inorganic nanoparticles limit their applications. A bismuth-based gold-crowned nanocomposite (BACN) was rationally designed and successfully synthesized and could then be used to prepare nanoplatforms with excellent biocompatibilities for synergistic therapy and real-time imaging. Because of the constituent gold nanoparticles and pyridine, the nanoplatforms functioned as drug delivery vehicles, ultrasonically activated sonosensitizers, and photothermal agents. The BACNs exhibited excellent photothermal conversion efficiency (79.1%) in the second near-infrared biowindow (1064 nm). Cellular and mouse experiments demonstrated that under laser and ultrasound irradiation bufalin-loaded BACNs significantly reduced cancer cell counts and completely eradicated tumors, along with great therapeutic biosafety and no discernible recurrence. Additionally, BACNs were also used as contrast agents in computed tomography-photoacoustic imaging. The versatile BACN nanoplatform with multitreatment effects and trimodal imaging properties shows immense potential as an antitumor nanotherapeutic system.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
