---
pmid: '38092263'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2023.123703
pmcid: ''
title: Recent progress in drug delivery systems for tyrosine kinase inhibitors in
  the treatment of lung cancer.
authors:
- Korucu Aktas Pelinsu
- Baysal Ipek
- Yabanoglu-Ciftci Samiye
- Lamprecht Alf
- Arica Betul
journal: International journal of pharmaceutics
year: 2024
month: 1
volume: '650'
issue: ''
pages: '123703'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 7
mesh_terms:
- Male
- Female
- Humans
- Lung Neoplasms
- Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors
- ErbB Receptors
- Drug Delivery Systems
- Mutation
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types:
- lung
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- tyrosine kinase
drugs:
- afatinib
- erlotinib
- gefitinib
- lipid
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Lung Cancer Treatments and Mutations
diseases_annotated:
- Lung cancer
- cancer
- lung cancer
- toxicity
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 4
icite_rcr: 0.5671884118077536
icite_percentile: 30.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Recent progress in drug delivery systems for tyrosine kinase inhibitors in the treatment of lung cancer.

## Abstract

Lung cancer ranks as the second most commonly diagnosed cancer in both men and women worldwide. Despite the availability of diverse diagnostic and treatment strategies, it remains the leading cause of cancer-related deaths globally. The current treatment approaches for lung cancer involve the utilization of first generation (e.g., erlotinib, gefitinib) and second generation (e.g., afatinib) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). These TKIs exert their effects by inhibiting a crucial enzyme called tyrosine kinase, which is responsible for cell survival signaling. However, their clinical effectiveness is hindered by limited solubility and oral bioavailability. Nanotechnology has emerged as a significant application in modern cancer therapy. Nanoparticle-based drug delivery systems, including lipid, polymeric, hybrid, inorganic, dendrimer, and micellar nanoparticles, have been designed to enhance the bioavailability, stability, and retention of these drugs within the targeted lung area. Furthermore, these nanoparticle-based delivery systems offer several advantages, such as increased therapeutic efficacy and reduced side effects and toxicity. This review focuses on the recent advancements in drug delivery systems for some of the most important TKIs, shedding light on their potential in improving lung cancer treatment.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
