---
pmid: '38158477'
doi: 10.1007/s11864-023-01155-3
pmcid: ''
title: Systemic Therapy for Melanoma Brain and Leptomeningeal Metastases.
authors:
- Sherman Wendy J
- Romiti Edoardo
- Michaelides Loizos
- Moniz-Garcia Diogo
- Chaichana Kaisorn L
- Quiñones-Hinojosa Alfredo
- Porter Alyx B
journal: Current treatment options in oncology
year: 2023
month: 12
volume: '24'
issue: '12'
pages: 1962-1977
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 11
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Melanoma
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf
- Quality of Life
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Brain
- Brain Neoplasms
- Radiosurgery
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types:
- melanoma
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- BRAF
drugs:
- ipilimumab
- nivolumab
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Brain Metastases and Treatment
diseases_annotated:
- Melanoma
- Melanoma Brain and Leptomeningeal Metastases
- Melanoma brain metastases
- OPINION
- edema
- melanoma
- metastases
- metastasize to
- neurotoxicity
- symptoms
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 6
icite_rcr: 0.5253867917154916
icite_percentile: 28.7
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Systemic Therapy for Melanoma Brain and Leptomeningeal Metastases.

## Abstract

Melanoma has a high propensity to metastasize to the brain which portends a poorer prognosis. With advanced radiation techniques and targeted therapies, outcomes however are improving. Melanoma brain metastases are best managed in a multi-disciplinary approach, including medical oncologists, neuro-oncologists, radiation oncologists, and neurosurgeons. The sequence of therapies is dependent on the number and size of brain metastases, status of systemic disease control, prior therapies, performance status, and neurological symptoms. The goal of treatment is to minimize neurologic morbidity and prolong both progression free and overall survival while maximizing quality of life. Surgery should be considered for solitary metastases, or large and/or symptomatic metastases with edema. Stereotactic radiosurgery offers a benefit over whole-brain radiation attributed to the relative radioresistance of melanoma and reduction in neurotoxicity. Thus far, data supports a more durable response with systemic therapy using combination immunotherapy of ipilimumab and nivolumab, though targeting the presence of BRAF mutations can also be utilized. BRAF inhibitor therapy is often used after immunotherapy failure, unless a more rapid initial response is needed and then can be done prior to initiating immunotherapy. Further trials are needed, particularly for leptomeningeal metastases which currently require the multi-disciplinary approach to determine best treatment plan.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
