---
pmid: '38317419'
doi: 10.1080/21645515.2024.2312600
pmcid: PMC10854361
title: Allergy to PEG (polyethylene glycol) - sensitivity of basophil activation test
  with COVID-19 mRNA-vaccine BNT162B2.
authors:
- Eberlein Bernadette
- Mathes Sonja
- Darsow Ulf
- Biedermann Tilo
- Brockow Knut
journal: Human vaccines & immunotherapeutics
year: 2024
month: 12
volume: '20'
issue: '1'
pages: '2312600'
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/21645515.2024.2312600?download=true
cited_by_count: 4
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Basophil Degranulation Test
- BNT162 Vaccine
- Polyethylene Glycols
- COVID-19 Vaccines
- Immunoglobulin E
- Flow Cytometry
- COVID-19
- Hypersensitivity
- Basophils
- RNA, Messenger
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- mRNA-vaccine
- nanoparticle
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- CCR3
- CD63
drugs:
- PEG
- PEG allergic
- PEG allergy
- PEGylated lipid nanoparticles
- polyethylene glycol
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Drug-Induced Adverse Reactions
diseases_annotated:
- COVID-19
- cancer
- sensitization
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 4
icite_rcr: 1.1196945081669825
icite_percentile: 54.4
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Allergy to PEG (polyethylene glycol) - sensitivity of basophil activation test with COVID-19 mRNA-vaccine BNT162B2.

## Abstract

Basophil activation test (BAT) with COVID-19 mRNA vaccine seems particularly suitable for detecting sensitization to polyethylene glycol (PEG) in patients with PEG allergy. It was the aim of this study to determine the cutoffs for BAT using BNT162B2 (Comirnaty®) in a larger group of PEG allergic patients and controls. 10 PEG allergic patients and 10 controls were studied. BAT was performed using anti-CCR3 for basophil identification and anti-CD63 to assess basophil activation. Incubations with BNT162B2 at four different concentrations were performed. Basophil activation was significantly higher in PEG allergic patients compared to controls at the higher concentrations used. ROC curves showed best results with a sensitivity of 60% and specificity of 100% with a cutoff of 5% CD63+ basophils at a concentration of 4.5 µg/ml. Controls showed no positive results. In our group of PEG allergic patients, a concentration of 4.5 µg/ml BNT162B2 with a cutoff of 5% CD63+ basophils was the most suitable condition for identifying patients with a sensitization to PEG. Allergological work-up of PEG allergic patients including BAT with PEGylated lipid nanoparticles might play a role in the future when these substances will be used for other vaccines and cancer immunotherapies.

## Full Text

Allergy to PEG (polyethylene glycol) – sensitivity of basophil activation test with COVID-19 mRNA-vaccine BNT162B2

ABSTRACT

Basophil activation test (BAT) with COVID-19 mRNA vaccine seems particularly suitable for detecting sensitization to polyethylene glycol (PEG) in patients with PEG allergy. It was the aim of this study to determine the cutoffs for BAT using BNT162B2 (Comirnaty®) in a larger group of PEG allergic patients and controls. 10 PEG allergic patients and 10 controls were studied. BAT was performed using anti-CCR3 for basophil identification and anti-CD63 to assess basophil activation. Incubations with BNT162B2 at four different concentrations were performed. Basophil activation was significantly higher in PEG allergic patients compared to controls at the higher concentrations used. ROC curves showed best results with a sensitivity of 60% and specificity of 100% with a cutoff of 5% CD63+ basophils at a concentration of 4.5 µg/ml. Controls showed no positive results. In our group of PEG allergic patients, a concentration of 4.5 µg/ml BNT162B2 with a cutoff of 5% CD63+ basophils was the most suitable condition for identifying patients with a sensitization to PEG. Allergological work-up of PEG allergic patients including BAT with PEGylated lipid nanoparticles might play a role in the future when these substances will be used for other vaccines and cancer immunotherapies.

Since the beginning of the COVID-19 vaccination campaign, there have been discussions about the extent to which COVID-19 vaccines can trigger allergic reactions. To date, mRNA COVID-19 vaccine reactions have not been proven to be IgE-mediated and the mechanisms are still not entirely clear. Since polyethylene glycol (PEG), which is found on PEGylated lipid nanoparticles (PEG-LNP) of the mRNA vaccines, was suspected as a trigger from the beginning, investigations were carried out especially in PEG allergic patients. Positive results were obtained here, which finally supported an IgE-mediated mechanism of PEG allergy. Since the basophil activation test (BAT) is suitable as an in vitro test for detecting IgE-mediated drug allergies, it was used in allergology work-up and interestingly showed the highest activation values with a mRNA vaccine (BNT162B2, Comirnaty®) compared to other PEG-containing drugs in this group of patients. BAT with a mRNA vaccine thus seems particularly suitable for detecting sensitization to PEG in patients with PEG allergy. However, thresholds for a positive result were not always specified or used similarly to other drug allergies because the number of patients investigated was small. This study aimed to determine the cutoffs for BAT using BNT162B2 in a larger group of PEG allergic patients and controls.

10 PEG allergic patients (2 males, 8 females, 28 to 79 years) presenting in the year 2021 and 2022 for allergological work up and 10 controls (4 males, 6 females, 23 to 62 years) were studied (Tables 1 and 2).

The Flow CAST (BÜHLMANN Laboratories AG, Schönenbuch, Switzerland) was used for quantitative measurement of in vitro basophil activation, as previously described: Venous blood was collected in 10-mL EDTA tubes from each subject. For each subject and allergen, polystyrene tubes were prepared with 50 μL of allergen at the defined concentration and diluted in 100 μL of stimulation buffer (containing heparin, Ca2+, and IL-3 [2 ng/mL]). An anti-FcεRI mAb and anti – N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine were used as positive controls. Background values were assessed with 50 μL of stimulation buffer. We added and gently homogenized 50 μL of each subject’s whole blood (with EDTA), added 20 μL of staining reagent (anti-CD63–fluorescein isothiocyanate and anti-CCR3–phycoerythrin mAbs), and mixed and incubated the solution at 37°C for 25 minutes in an incubator. Two milliliters of lysing buffer stopped the stimulation within 5 minutes of incubation in the dark at room temperature, followed by centrifugation of the solution for 5 minutes at 460 g. The supernatant was decanted, and stained cells were washed with 300 μL of washing buffer. Cells were resuspended by means of gentle vortexing and analyzed by using BD FACSCanto II (Becton Dickinson Immunocytometry System; Becton Dickinson, Heidelberg, Germany) with BD FACSDiva software. Basophils were gated as low side scatter CCR3+/side scatterlow. Anti-CCR3 was used as a selection marker to separate basophils from other leukocytes. Upregulation of the basophil activation marker CD63 was calculated based on the percentage of CD63+ cells compared with the total number of identified basophils. In each assay a minimum of 300 events (ie, basophils) were recorded. Details of the flowcytometric data acquisition can be found in Supplementary Methods and Fig. S1.

BNT162B2 was used at four different end concentrations (0.18 µg/ml; 0.9 µg/ml; 4.5 µg/ml; 22.5 µg/ml corresponding to concentrations after reconstitution of 0.8 µg/ml; 4 µg/ml; 20 µg/ml; 100 µg/ml).

Basophil activation with BNT162B2 (mean ± SD in % CD63+ basophils) was significantly higher in PEG allergic patients compared to controls at the higher concentrations used: Concentrations of 0.9 µg/ml/4.5 µg/ml/22.5 µg/ml induced a significant (p < .01) upregulation of 10.95 ± 11.7/15.55 ± 15.26/9.26 ± 10.03 in PEG allergic patients vs. 1.52 ± 1.3/1.46 ± 1.53/1.73 ± 1.90 in controls (Figure 1). ROC curves showed best results with a sensitivity of 60% and specificity of 100% with a cutoff of 5% CD63+ basophils at a concentration of 4.5 µg/ml (Figure 2).  

In our group of PEG allergic patients, a concentration of 4.5 µg/ml BNT with a cutoff of 5% CD63+ basophils was the most suitable condition for identifying patients with a sensitization to PEG. This cutoff was the same or lower than thresholds used in the literature with lower numbers of patients. This study also showed that the sensitivity was in a similar range compared to other drugs. It remains unclear why the test was negative in some patients despite positive provocation tests (e.g. patient 7). One could assume a decreasing sensitization over time as has also been described for skin tests or a non-IgE-mediated mechanism.

This manuscript only contains data on BAT in PEG-allergic patients, not in patients with proven hypersensitivity reactions to PEG-containing vaccines. Since the vast majority of people who reacted to the first vaccination tolerated the second vaccination, an IgE-mediated allergy to PEG-containing vaccines appears to be extremely rare. There are some data in the literature that reported hypersensitivity reactions to PEG-containing vaccines are not IgE-mediated and rather pseudo-allergic reactions via the activation of anaphylatoxins C5a. None of these tested patients (n = 5) in this study demonstrated a positive BAT to the BNT162B2 vaccine.

In the manuscript of Labella et al. 5 out of 10 controls with COVID-infection (3 non-vaccinated and 2 vaccinated) showed a positive result in the BAT. Also other investigators presented results of 6 controls including 3 with a polymerase chain reaction confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection in the 3 months before sampling with no reactivity to BNT162B2. Our negative results in 8 controls with previous COVID-19 infection (2 non-vaccinated and 6 vaccinated) are consistent with the latter results.

Although PEG allergy has a low prevalence, allergological work-up of PEG allergic patients including BAT with PEG-LNPs might play a role in the future when these substances will be used not only for vaccination, but also for cancer immunotherapies.

Disclosure statement

BE reports non-financial support from Bühlmann Laboratories outside the submitted work. KB received lecture fees from ALK, Bencard and ThermoFisher and reports non-financial support from Bühlmann Laboratories outside the submitted work. The rest of the authors declare that they have no relevant conflicts of interest.

Author contribution

BE conceived, designed and supervised the experiments. BE had full access to all of the data in the study, is the guarantors of this study and wrote the paper. SM, UD, TB and KB have made contributions to the allergology work-up of the patients, data interpretation and revision of the manuscript. All authors agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work.
