---
pmid: '38382538'
doi: 10.1146/annurev-immunol-101819-024752
pmcid: PMC11213679
title: 'Beyond the Barrier: Unraveling the Mechanisms of Immunotherapy Resistance.'
authors:
- Bell Hannah N
- Zou Weiping
journal: Annual review of immunology
year: 2024
month: 6
volume: '42'
issue: '1'
pages: 521-550
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-immunol-101819-024752
cited_by_count: 78
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Tumor Microenvironment
- Neoplasms
- Drug Resistance, Neoplasm
- Animals
- Immunotherapy
- Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors
- Epigenesis, Genetic
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- ICB resistance
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Immunotherapy and Immune Responses
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- obesity
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 70
icite_rcr: 9.251762441250005
icite_percentile: 97.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Beyond the Barrier: Unraveling the Mechanisms of Immunotherapy Resistance.

## Abstract

Immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) induces a remarkable and durable response in a subset of cancer patients. However, most patients exhibit either primary or acquired resistance to ICB. This resistance arises from a complex interplay of diverse dynamic mechanisms within the tumor microenvironment (TME). These mechanisms include genetic, epigenetic, and metabolic alterations that prevent T cell trafficking to the tumor site, induce immune cell dysfunction, interfere with antigen presentation, drive heightened expression of coinhibitory molecules, and promote tumor survival after immune attack. The TME worsens ICB resistance through the formation of immunosuppressive networks via immune inhibition, regulatory metabolites, and abnormal resource consumption. Finally, patient lifestyle factors, including obesity and microbiome composition, influence ICB resistance. Understanding the heterogeneity of cellular, molecular, and environmental factors contributing to ICB resistance is crucial to develop targeted therapeutic interventions that enhance the clinical response. This comprehensive overview highlights key mechanisms of ICB resistance that may be clinically translatable.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
