---
pmid: '38509717'
doi: 10.1111/exd.15049
pmcid: ''
title: NECTIN4-targeted antibody-drug conjugate is a potential therapeutic option
  for extramammary Paget disease.
authors:
- Tanaka Yuka
- Ito Takamichi
- Murata Maho
- Tanegashima Keiko
- Kaku-Ito Yumiko
- Nakahara Takeshi
journal: Experimental dermatology
year: 2024
month: 3
volume: '33'
issue: '3'
pages: e15049
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdfdirect/10.1111/exd.15049
cited_by_count: 7
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Paget Disease, Extramammary
- Neoplasms
- Epidermis
- Cell Adhesion Molecules
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- antibody-drug-conjugate
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invitro
genes:
- NECTIN4
- Nectin cell adhesion molecule 4
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer and Skin Lesions
diseases_annotated:
- EMPD
- EMPD lesions
- Extramammary Paget disease
- cancers
- extramammary Paget disease
- skin cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 6
icite_rcr: 1.553561465300533
icite_percentile: 66.2
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# NECTIN4-targeted antibody-drug conjugate is a potential therapeutic option for extramammary Paget disease.

## Abstract

Extramammary Paget disease (EMPD) is a rare skin cancer mainly found in areas rich in apocrine sweat glands. Since the effective treatments for advanced and/or metastasized EMPD are limited, there is an urgent need to develop novel therapeutic approaches. Nectin cell adhesion molecule 4 (NECTIN4) is highly expressed in cancers and considered to be a promising therapeutic target. NECTIN4 is also expressed in EMPD, but its role and the efficacy of NECTIN4-targeted therapy in EMPD remain unclear. This study investigated the potential of NECTIN4 as a novel therapeutic target for EMPD. NECTIN4 expression was immunohistochemically analysed in EMPD patients' primary (118 samples) and metastatic (21 samples) lesions. Using an EMPD cell line, KS-EMPD-1, the effects of NECTIN4 inhibition on cell proliferation and migration were investigated. NECTIN4 was expressed in primary and metastatic EMPD lesions, and the H-score of NECTIN4 staining was significantly higher in metastatic lesions than in primary ones. Knockdown of NECTIN4 significantly inhibited cell proliferation and affected cell migration. The cytotoxic effects of NECTIN4-targeted antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) were further evaluated, revealing a significant decrease in EMPD cell viability. In conclusion, NECTIN4 is a potential therapeutic target and NECTIN4-targeted ADC is promising as a therapeutic option for EMPD.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
