---
pmid: '38527565'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2024.124015
pmcid: ''
title: Ultrasound imaging guided targeted sonodynamic therapy enhanced by magnetophoretically
  controlled magnetic microbubbles.
authors:
- Zhu Yao
- Arkin Gulzira
- He Tianzhen
- Guo Fengjuan
- Zhang Ling
- Wu Yu
- Prasad Paras N
- Xie Zhongjian
journal: International journal of pharmaceutics
year: 2024
month: 4
volume: '655'
issue: ''
pages: '124015'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 18
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Female
- Microbubbles
- Reactive Oxygen Species
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Ultrasonography
- Ultrasonic Therapy
- Breast Neoplasms
- Phosphorus
- Magnetic Phenomena
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
- sonodynamic
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: preclinical-invitro
genes: []
drugs:
- BP
- BP nanosheets
- Fe3O4
- ROS
- black phosphorus
- magnetic black phosphorus
- reactive oxygen species
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- breast cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 11
icite_rcr: 2.400004492965959
icite_percentile: 79.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Ultrasound imaging guided targeted sonodynamic therapy enhanced by magnetophoretically controlled magnetic microbubbles.

## Abstract

Sonodynamic therapy (SDT) utilizes ultrasonic excitation of a sensitizer to generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) to destroy tumor. Two dimensional (2D) black phosphorus (BP) is an emerging sonosensitizer that can promote ROS production to be used in SDT but it alone lacks active targeting effect and showed low therapy efficiency. In this study, a stable dispersion of integrated micro-nanoplatform consisting of BP nanosheets loaded and Fe3O4 nanoparticles (NPs) connected microbubbles was introduced for ultrasound imaging guided and magnetic field directed precision SDT of breast cancer. The targeted ultrasound imaging at 18 MHz and efficient SDT effects at 1 MHz were demonstrated both in-vitro and in-vivo on the breast cancer. The magnetic microbubbles targeted deliver BP nanosheets to the tumor site under magnetic navigation and increased the uptake of BP nanosheets by inducing cavitation effect for increased cell membrane permeability via ultrasound targeted microbubble destruction (UTMD). The mechanism of SDT by magnetic black phosphorus microbubbles was proposed to be originated from the ROS triggered mitochondria mediated apoptosis by up-regulating the pro-apoptotic proteins while down-regulating the anti-apoptotic proteins. In conclusion, the ultrasound theranostic was realized via the magnetic black phosphorus microbubbles, which could realize targeting and catalytic sonodynamic therapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
