---
pmid: '38536602'
doi: 10.1007/s12328-024-01959-2
pmcid: ''
title: 'Endoscopic loco-regional treatment in controlling pancreatic neuroendocrine
  tumors (PNETs) behavior: a case series and literature review.'
authors:
- Lesmana Cosmas Rinaldi Adithya
journal: Clinical journal of gastroenterology
year: 2024
month: 8
volume: '17'
issue: '4'
pages: 754-759
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 5
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Pancreatic Neoplasms
- Neuroendocrine Tumors
- Endosonography
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Male
- Adult
- Aged
- Radiofrequency Ablation
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Case Reports
mechanisms:
- frequency-therapy
cancer_types:
- pancreatic
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Neuroendocrine Tumor Research Advances
diseases_annotated:
- NF-PNET
- PNET
- PNETs
- Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors
- insulinoma
- metastatic
- pancreatic cancer
- pancreatic malignancy
- pancreatic neoplasms
- pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 6
icite_rcr: 2.080801023056744
icite_percentile: 75.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Endoscopic loco-regional treatment in controlling pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PNETs) behavior: a case series and literature review.

## Abstract

Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PNETs) are considered rare pancreatic neoplasms, and it is a challenging disease entity due to its indolent behavior and is difficult to manage. Diagnostic challenge is usually found in the imaging-based approach, such as transabdominal ultrasound, abdominal CT scan, and abdominal MRI. Surgery is still the main key player in controlling the disease. The main problems in clinical practice are the early detection of small PNETs lesion and non-functional PNET (NF-PNET) cases. Most cases usually come with large tumor size or metastatic disease. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) has been well-known as the most sensitive tool for early detection of pancreatic malignancy. It has now also been developed for managing pancreatic cancer, such as tumor ablation therapy. We presented four variety of PNETs cases (one patient with non-functioning PNETs and three patients with functioning PNETs) who have been successfully treated with EUS-guided radiofrequency ablation (RFA) with good control of tumor growth during follow-up. One patient with a large-size insulinoma could have the tumor controlled gradually after several EUS-RFA sessions. No adverse events or major complications were observed during and after the EUS-RFA procedure. EUS has been shown as a promising tool not only for more accurate diagnosis but also for tumor growth control. However, it would need further comparison studies between EUS and surgical approaches to make a better treatment strategy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
