---
pmid: '38599100'
doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2024.112037
pmcid: ''
title: 'The dawn of a new Era: mRNA vaccines in colorectal cancer immunotherapy.'
authors:
- Song Jingjing
- Zhang Yujun
- Zhou Chulin
- Zhan Jianhao
- Cheng Xifu
- Huang Haoyu
- Mao Shengxun
- Zong Zhen
journal: International immunopharmacology
year: 2024
month: 5
volume: '132'
issue: ''
pages: '112037'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 5
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Humans
- Cancer Vaccines
- Colorectal Neoplasms
- Immunotherapy
- mRNA Vaccines
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- mRNA-vaccine
cancer_types:
- colorectal
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Immunotherapy and Immune Responses
diseases_annotated:
- COVID-19
- CRC
- Colorectal cancer
- cancer
- colorectal cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 4
icite_rcr: 0.5090307107875517
icite_percentile: 27.8
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# The dawn of a new Era: mRNA vaccines in colorectal cancer immunotherapy.

## Abstract

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a typical cancer that accounts for 10% of all new cancer cases annually and nearly 10% of all cancer deaths. Despite significant progress in current classical interventions for CRC, these traditional strategies could be invasive and with numerous adverse effects. The poor prognosis of CRC patients highlights the evident and pressing need for more efficient and targeted treatment. Novel strategies regarding mRNA vaccines for anti-tumor therapy have also been well-developed since the successful application for the prevention of COVID-19. mRNA vaccine technology won the 2023 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, signaling a new direction in human anti-cancer treatment: mRNA medicine. As a promising new immunotherapy in CRC and other multiple cancer treatments, the mRNA vaccine has higher specificity, better efficacy, and fewer side effects than traditional strategies. The present review outlines the basics of mRNA vaccines and their advantages over other vaccines and informs an available strategy for developing efficient mRNA vaccines for CRC precise treatment. In the future, more exploration of mRNA vaccines for CRC shall be attached, fostering innovation to address existing limitations.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
