---
pmid: '38678386'
doi: 10.1002/adma.202404645
pmcid: ''
title: Fluorinated Organic Polymers for Cancer Drug Delivery.
authors:
- Xin Jingrui
- Lu Xue
- Cao Jimin
- Wu Weihui
- Liu Qian
- Wang Deping
- Zhou Xin
- Ding Dan
journal: Advanced materials (Deerfield Beach, Fla.)
year: 2024
month: 7
volume: '36'
issue: '30'
pages: e2404645
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 44
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Polymers
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Neoplasms
- Animals
- Halogenation
- Drug Carriers
- Drug Delivery Systems
- Nanoparticles
- Hydrophobic and Hydrophilic Interactions
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- Fluorinated Organic Polymers
- carbon
- fluorine
- lipid
- polymer
- polymers
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated: []
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 30
icite_rcr: 5.380145040255059
icite_percentile: 93.8
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Fluorinated Organic Polymers for Cancer Drug Delivery.

## Abstract

In the realm of cancer therapy, the spotlight is on nanoscale pharmaceutical delivery systems, especially polymer-based nanoparticles, for their enhanced drug dissolution, extended presence in the bloodstream, and precision targeting achieved via surface engineering. Leveraging the amplified permeation and retention phenomenon, these systems concentrate therapeutic agents within tumor tissues. Nonetheless, the hurdles of systemic toxicity, biological barriers, and compatibility with living systems persist. Fluorinated polymers, distinguished by their chemical idiosyncrasies, are poised for extensive biomedical applications, notably in stabilizing drug metabolism, augmenting lipophilicity, and optimizing bioavailability. Material science heralds the advent of fluorinated polymers that, by integrating fluorine atoms, unveil a suite of drug delivery merits: the hydrophobic traits of fluorinated alkyl chains ward off lipid or protein disruption, the carbon-fluorine bond's stability extends the drug's lifecycle in the system, and a lower alkalinity coupled with a diminished ionic charge bolsters the drug's ability to traverse cellular membranes. This comprehensive review delves into the utilization of fluorinated polymers for oncological pharmacotherapy, elucidating their molecular architecture, synthetic pathways, and functional attributes, alongside an exploration of their empirical strengths and the quandaries they encounter in both experimental and clinical settings.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
