---
pmid: '38708707'
doi: 10.1002/smll.202401931
pmcid: ''
title: A Functional "Key" Amplified Piezoelectric Effect Modulates ROS Storm with
  an Open Source for Multimodal Synergistic Cancer Therapy.
authors:
- Yu Chenghao
- Li Jialin
- Zang Pengyu
- Feng Lili
- Tian Boshi
- Zhao Ruoxi
- Xie Ying
- Wu Linzhi
- Chen Zhigang
- Yang Piaoping
journal: Small (Weinheim an der Bergstrasse, Germany)
year: 2024
month: 9
volume: '20'
issue: '36'
pages: e2401931
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 16
mesh_terms:
- Reactive Oxygen Species
- Humans
- Neoplasms
- Animals
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Mice
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Cerium
- Tumor Microenvironment
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- sonodynamic
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invitro
genes: []
drugs:
- CBFO
- Ce
- Ce-doped BiFeO3
- Ce3+
- Fe2+
- O2 -
- OH
- ROS
- reactive oxygen species
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated: []
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 11
icite_rcr: 1.8919820204865494
icite_percentile: 72.8
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# A Functional "Key" Amplified Piezoelectric Effect Modulates ROS Storm with an Open Source for Multimodal Synergistic Cancer Therapy.

## Abstract

Chemodynamic therapy (CDT) is a non-invasive strategy for generating reactive oxygen species (ROS) and is promising for cancer treatment. However, increasing ROS in tumor therapy remains challenging. Therefore, exogenous excitation and inhibition of electron-hole pair recombination are attractive for modulating ROS storms in tumors. Herein, a Ce-doped BiFeO3 (CBFO) piezoelectric sonosensitizer to modulate ROS generation and realize a synergistic mechanism of CDT/sonodynamic therapy and piezodynamic therapy (PzDT) is proposed. The mixed Fe2+ and Ce3+ can implement a circular Fenton/Fenton-like reaction in the tumor microenvironment. Abundant ·OH can be generated by ultrasound (US) stimulation to enhance CDT efficacy. As a typical piezoelectric sonosensitizer, CBFO can produce O2 - owing to the enhanced polarization by the US, resulting in the motion of charge carriers. In addition, CBFO can produce a piezoresponse irradiated upon US, which accelerates the migration rate of electrons/holes in opposite directions and results in energy band bending, further achieving toxic ROS production and realizing PzDT. Density functional theory calculations confirmed that Ce doping shortens the diffusion of electrons and improves the conductivity and catalytic activity of CBFO. This distinct US-enhanced strategy emphasizes the effects of doping engineering and piezoelectric-optimized therapy and shows great potential for the treatment of malignant tumors.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
