---
pmid: '38762277'
doi: 10.1016/bs.apcsb.2023.12.007
pmcid: ''
title: Molecular insights and promise of oncolytic virus based immunotherapy.
authors:
- Iyer Mahalaxmi
- Ravichandran Nandita
- Karuppusamy Panimalar Abirami
- Gnanarajan Roselin
- Yadav Mukesh Kumar
- Narayanasamy Arul
- Vellingiri Balachandar
journal: Advances in protein chemistry and structural biology
year: 2024
month: null
volume: '140'
issue: ''
pages: 419-492
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 1
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Oncolytic Viruses
- Neoplasms
- Immunotherapy
- Oncolytic Virotherapy
- Animals
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- oncolytic-virus
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Virus-based gene therapy research
diseases_annotated: []
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 1
icite_rcr: 0.3253987537581163
icite_percentile: 17.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Molecular insights and promise of oncolytic virus based immunotherapy.

## Abstract

Discovering a therapeutic that can counteract the aggressiveness of this disease's mechanism is crucial for improving survival rates for cancer patients and for better understanding the most different types of cancer. In recent years, using these viruses as an anticancer therapy has been thought to be successful. They mostly work by directly destroying cancer cells, activating the immune system to fight cancer, and expressing exogenous effector genes. For the treatment of tumors, oncolytic viruses (OVs), which can be modified to reproduce only in tumor tissues and lyse them while preserving the healthy non-neoplastic host cells and reinstating antitumor immunity which present a novel immunotherapeutic strategy. OVs can exist naturally or be created in a lab by altering existing viruses. These changes heralded the beginning of a new era of less harmful virus-based cancer therapy. We discuss three different types of oncolytic viruses that have already received regulatory approval to treat cancer as well as clinical research using oncolytic adenoviruses. The primary therapeutic applications, mechanism of action of oncolytic virus updates, future views of this therapy will be covered in this chapter.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
