---
pmid: '38819691'
doi: 10.1021/acs.accounts.4c00190
pmcid: PMC11191407
title: 'Nanoinjection: A Platform for Innovation in Ex Vivo Cell Engineering.'
authors:
- Chen Yaping
- Shokouhi Ali-Reza
- Voelcker Nicolas H
- Elnathan Roey
journal: Accounts of chemical research
year: 2024
month: 6
volume: '57'
issue: '12'
pages: 1722-1735
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.1021/acs.accounts.4c00190
cited_by_count: 18
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Cell Engineering
- Receptors, Chimeric Antigen
- Nanotechnology
- T-Lymphocytes
- Electroporation
- Injections
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- car-t
- crispr
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- CAR
- CARs
- chimeric antigen receptor
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: RNA Interference and Gene Delivery
diseases_annotated: []
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 15
icite_rcr: 2.3874065994511007
icite_percentile: 79.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
biology_processes: []
resistant_states: []
---

# Nanoinjection: A Platform for Innovation in Ex Vivo Cell Engineering.

## Abstract

In human cells, intracellular access and therapeutic cargo transport, including gene-editing tools (e.g., CRISPR-Cas9 and transposons), nucleic acids (e.g., DNA, mRNA, and siRNA), peptides, and proteins (e.g., enzymes and antibodies), are tightly constrained to ensure healthy cell function and behavior. This principle is exemplified in the delivery mechanisms of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-T cells for ex-vivo immunotherapy. In particular, the clinical success of CAR-T cells has established a new standard of care by curing previously incurable blood cancers. The approach involves the delivery, typically via the use of electroporation (EP) and lentivirus, of therapeutic CAR genes into a patient's own T cells, which are then engineered to express CARs that target and combat their blood cancer. But the key difficulty lies in genetically manipulating these cells without causing irreversible damage or loss of function─all the while minimizing complexities of manufacturing, safety concerns, and costs, and ensuring the efficacy of the final CAR-T cell product.Nanoinjection─the process of intracellular delivery using nanoneedles (NNs)─is an emerging physical delivery route that efficiently negotiates the plasma membrane of many cell types, including primary human T cells. It occurs with minimal perturbation, invasiveness, and toxicity, with high efficiency and throughput at high spatial and temporal resolutions. Nanoinjection promises greatly improved delivery of a broad range of therapeutic cargos with little or no damage to those cargos. A nanoinjection platform allows these cargos to function in the intracellular space as desired. The adaptability of nanoinjection platforms is now bringing major advantages in immunomodulation, mechanotransduction, sampling of cell states (nanobiopsy), controlled intracellular interrogation, and the primary focus of this account─intracellular delivery and its applications in ex vivo cell engineering. Mechanical nanoinjection typically exerts direct mechanical force on the cell membrane, offering a straightforward route to improve membrane perturbation by the NNs and subsequent transport of genetic cargo into targeted cell type (adherent or suspension cells). By contrast, electroactive nanoinjection is controlled by coupling NNs with an electric field─a new route for activating electroporation (EP) at the nanoscale─allowing a dramatic reduction of the applied voltage to a cell and so minimizing post-EP damage to cells and cargo, and overcoming many of the limitations of conventional bulk EP. Nanoinjection transcends mere technique; it is an approach to cell engineering ex vivo, offering the potential to endow cells with new, powerful features such as generating chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-T cells for future CAR-T cell technologies. We first discuss the manufacturing of NN devices (Section 2), then delve into nanoinjection-mediated cell engineering (Section 3), nanoinjection mechanisms and interfacing methodologies (Section 4), and emerging applications in using nanoinjection to create functional CAR-T cells (Section 5).

## Full Text

Nanoinjection: A Platform for Innovation in Ex Vivo Cell Engineering

Conspectus

In human cells, intracellular access and therapeutic cargo transport, including gene-editing tools (e.g., CRISPR–Cas9 and transposons), nucleic acids (e.g., DNA, mRNA, and siRNA), peptides, and proteins (e.g., enzymes and antibodies), are tightly constrained to ensure healthy cell function and behavior. This principle is exemplified in the delivery mechanisms of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-T cells for ex-vivo immunotherapy. In particular, the clinical success of CAR-T cells has established a new standard of care by curing previously incurable blood cancers. The approach involves the delivery, typically via the use of electroporation (EP) and lentivirus, of therapeutic CAR genes into a patient’s own T cells, which are then engineered to express CARs that target and combat their blood cancer. But the key difficulty lies in genetically manipulating these cells without causing irreversible damage or loss of function—all the while minimizing complexities of manufacturing, safety concerns, and costs, and ensuring the efficacy of the final CAR-T cell product.

Nanoinjection—the process of intracellular delivery using nanoneedles (NNs)—is an emerging physical delivery route that efficiently negotiates the plasma membrane of many cell types, including primary human T cells. It occurs with minimal perturbation, invasiveness, and toxicity, with high efficiency and throughput at high spatial and temporal resolutions. Nanoinjection promises greatly improved delivery of a broad range of therapeutic cargos with little or no damage to those cargos. A nanoinjection platform allows these cargos to function in the intracellular space as desired. The adaptability of nanoinjection platforms is now bringing major advantages in immunomodulation, mechanotransduction, sampling of cell states (nanobiopsy), controlled intracellular interrogation, and the primary focus of this account—intracellular delivery and its applications in ex vivo cell engineering.

Mechanical nanoinjection typically exerts direct mechanical force on the cell membrane, offering a straightforward route to improve membrane perturbation by the NNs and subsequent transport of genetic cargo into targeted cell type (adherent or suspension cells). By contrast, electroactive nanoinjection is controlled by coupling NNs with an electric field—a new route for activating electroporation (EP) at the nanoscale—allowing a dramatic reduction of the applied voltage to a cell and so minimizing post-EP damage to cells and cargo, and overcoming many of the limitations of conventional bulk EP. Nanoinjection transcends mere technique; it is an approach to cell engineering ex vivo, offering the potential to endow cells with new, powerful features such as generating chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-T cells for future CAR-T cell technologies.

We first discuss the manufacturing of NN devices (Section 2), then delve into nanoinjection-mediated cell engineering (Section 3), nanoinjection mechanisms and interfacing methodologies (Section 4), and emerging applications in using nanoinjection to create functional CAR-T cells (Section 5).

Introduction

The clinical success of engineering a patient’s own cells with greater precision and efficiency outside their body has spurred the development of emerging technology for generating CAR-T cells.− Nanoinjection is a physical delivery route that adeptly negotiates the plasma membrane of many cell types.− This process occurs with minimal perturbation and toxicity, achieving high efficiency and throughput at increased spatiotemporal resolutions.− At its core, nanoinjection is more than just a method: it is a gateway to innovation in ex vivo cell engineering. This includes the ability to endow cells with powerful new characteristics, such as the capacity to create CAR-T cells to fight against specific cancer cells.

The premise of nanoinjection is intricate and elegant. Conventional delivery methods—viral, chemical, and physical approaches—can achieve high levels of delivery efficiency. But they may have varying degrees of impact on cell and cargo function, with some potentially causing permanent alterations or perturbations. The extent of these effects can vary based on the route used and the conditions of delivery. These challenges cast a shadow over their potential to increase cellular delivery efficacy (which would reduce cell manufacturing time and costs) and to broaden the modalities and cellular targets of therapeutic delivery for ex vivo cell engineering. By contrast, nanoinjection has been shown to be transformative, for its capacity to interact with and traverse the plasma membranes of various cell types, including primary immune and stem cells, while minimizing damage or disruption. Nanoinjection promises improved delivery of a broad range of labile cargo agents—gene-editing tools, nucleic acids, proteins, and other bioactive molecules—with little or no damage to those agents. Such versatile nanoinjection allows these agents to function in the intracellular milieu as intended, ensuring high cell viability (often >90%) while minimizing biosafety risks, as there is no use of high-voltage electric pulses or reliance on viral vectors.

Current manufacturing of CAR-T cells involves four primary stages: first, the collection and isolation of cells; second, their activation; third, transfection with CAR constructs, typically using viral vectors; and fourth, expansion of the modified CAR-T cells to therapeutic quantities. Among the four stages, the third, transfection, is crucial and indispensable, where the T cells are genetically modified to express CARs, enabling them to target and eliminate cancer cells. This critical and currently problematic stage directly influences the efficacy and functionality of the CAR-T cell product.

Efficient intracellular delivery of CAR constructs can now be achieved using nonviral nanoinjection, a significant move toward generating functional CAR-T cell products.

Yet the journey of nanoinjection from a promising experimental route to an emerging toolkit for ex vivo cell engineering (such as CAR-T cell manufacturing) is rife with complexities, including the need to precisely control the insertion of genetic materials without compromising cell viability while minimizing batch-to-batch variability, scaling up for bulk manufacturing of cell products, and automating vein-to-vein workflows.

Fabrication of Nanoneedle Devices

Nanoneedle Arrays

Recent advances in nanofabrication technologies have enabled the development of high-aspect-ratio nanostructures (classified as NNs) with a diverse range of geometrical characteristics including shape, diameter, height, and density.− The most predominant NNs include: (1) Nanowires (NWs), which are typically in their porous form; (2) Nanostraws (NSs),− which resemble thin and hollow cylindrical pillars; and (3) Nanotubes (NTs), which are cylindrical pillars with a hollow inner cavity. All these various NN devices in their diverse configurations have been successfully interfaced with a variety of biological systems, including mammalian cells—whether adherent or nonadherent, immortalized or primary—and tissues.− The remainder of this section will outline the key nanofabrication routes we have used to manufacture a variety of NN devices, with focus on our group’s strategies.

Nanoneedle Device Fabrication through Surface Patterning

Metal-Assisted Chemical Etching (MACE)

One of the most straightforward and versatile methods for fabricating NNs is MACE. Over the past few years, our groups’ efforts in using MACE have demonstrated that by integrating a trio of patterning routes in combination with MACE—in particular, colloidal assembly–MACE, soft nanoparticles (microgels) templating–MACE,− and near-field laser ablation–MACE—we have successfully expanded the combinatorial possibilities for fabricating NNs. One of the simplest and most cost-effective methods we frequently employ is the patterning approach based on colloidal nanosphere lithography (NSL; Figure 1a).

An alternative route that our group and others have used to pattern customized lithographical masks is through the control of the self-assembly of soft nanoparticles (microgels) at a water–oil interface (known as SALI).− This strategy enables the production of tunable nonclose-packed particle arrays (Figure 1b). In both NSL- and SALI-based approaches, the deposited particle monolayer is used as a direct and customized lithographical etching mask to deposit a metal layer on top of the particle arrays to grow NNs of controlled diameter and spacing using MACE. During MACE, the substrate is selectively etched underneath the metal layer, exposing the NNs.

Electron-Beam Lithography

Combining EBL with DRIE provides a top-down fabrication approach that enables precise control over NNs’ geometrical parameters. Using this approach, our group has developed a nanofabrication route to create highly ordered NT arrays (Figure 1c).

Nanoneedle Device Fabrication without Surface Patterning

Nanoneedle Replication

In most nanofabrication strategies, the biggest challenges are complexity, cost of manufacturing, and throughput. In our recent work, we have demonstrated that polymeric NNs and NTs of precise geometry can be produced by replica molding and nanoimprint lithography (NIL); both of these are rapid, simple, and cost-effective nanofabrication synthesis paths. Polymeric (polystyrene or PS, SU8, and PDMS) NNs and NTs have the additional benefits of tunable stiffness, flexibility (non-rigid substrate), transparency, and scalability. For this purpose, we first designed and fabricated tunable Si NN/NT arrays, which act as a master template for producing the PDMS negative mold. Next, a targeted polymer (PS, SU8, and PDMS) is pressed into the mold and cured, forming a negative imprint of the master (Figure 1d). NIL-based approaches using polymers can significantly reduce the NN fabrication time frame at a large scale. These approaches require fine mold filling at the nanoscale, as well as careful tailoring of the mold surface chemistry to allow for successful casting, imprinting, and demolding.

Electroactive Nanoneedle Platform

In the hybrid nanoscale-EP platforms, the unique topography of NNs allows for localization of the applied electric field where the targeted cells are tightly interfacing with the NNs. Such biointerface allows generation of transient local membrane pores for rapid and direct intracellular access (Figure 2a, b).− This in turn facilitates the delivery of a broad range of cargos with minimal impact on cell viability and function. Most reported nanoscale-EP platforms have used polycarbonate-based NSs, with ability to deliver several types of cargos simultaneously or sequentially. In recent studies, we have developed an ENI platform that is based on vertically configured electroactive NT arrays (Figure 2c–e), allowing increased efficacy and precision over T cell intracellular access, and minimizing damage to cells and cargo post-EP.

Nanoinjection for Cell Engineering

Surface Chemistry

Surface Functionalization of NNs

NN chemical functionalization is a critical parameter to be considered when optimizing the interactions between NN devices, cargos, and cell types. When establishing a workflow for a specific nanoinjection application, the capacity to modulate NN surface chemistry through physical adsorption and covalent/noncovalent bonding can play a crucial role through enhancing the efficiency of cargo loading/release, assisting creation of a localized membrane fusion, promoting tight and uniform interfacial interactions, and controlling NNs’ biocompatibility and biodegradability.

Functionalization of NN surfaces can be achieved by using noncovalent immobilization methods—in particular, physisorption via solvent evaporation and transient electrostatic interactions—with which temporal control is achieved in the physical adsorption and subsequent dissociation of cargos from the nanoinjection platform. For instance, noncovalent ligand immobilization can promote cellular adhesion, leading to a tighter interface. Moreover, it can enhance surface wettability and cellular traction force and provide localized assistance in membrane fusion.− Collectively, these improvements facilitate the intracellular access of NN tips, thus increasing the efficiency of nanoinjection. For noncovalent interactions with negatively charged cargos (e.g., nucleic acids), the NN surface can be functionalized with positively charged protonated aminosilane, or with polycations such as poly-ornithines and poly-d/l-lysin—both of which allow for the rapid release of nucleic acids (upon exposure to physiological conditions). Coating NNs with branched poly-ethylenimine (25 kD) has been shown to significantly enhance the transfection efficiency of plasmid DNA that encodes Renilla luciferase as a reporter gene.

Alternatively, an increase in nanoinjection efficacy can be achieved by using covalent immobilization routes—using static or releasable tethers—allowing desirable cargo to be anchored to NN surfaces.− Covalent attachment is an ideal strategy for pinning enzymes and peptides to the NN surface. Cargos are either permanently or temporarily attached through static or cleavable linkers, respectively. This method ensures the cargo’s presentation to the desired cellular compartment. For example, cleavable covalent interactions (containing disulfide bonds) will significantly reduce the initial burst release of cargo, for more sustained release of cargos. Functionalizing SiNNs with amine-, aldehyde-, or epoxide-terminated silanes are common routes for further tethering molecules and subsequent bioconjugation. Covalent interactions in the form of bioconjugation can induce targeted interface functionality. Such bioconjugation relies on amide and thio-succinimide linkages, click chemistry for biorthogonal tethering of peptides/proteins, reversible disulfide bonds, and cleavable and stimulus-responsive units.

The inclusion of both noncovalent and covalent tethering strategies highlights the versatility of surface modifications for nanoinjection applications and controlled release of targeted cargos. A noteworthy aspect of our methodology involves applying vacuum to optimize the quality of the coating on the NNs under vacuum, leading to much tighter physisorption of polymers such as PDL on the polymer and silicon NN surface than with immobilization under atmospheric pressure.

An alternative strategy is first to coat SiNNs with PDL and cell-binding antibodies (anti-CD3 and anti-CD28; for primary human T cell binding), leading to a more uniform adhesion of the T cells on the NN surface (Figure 3, unpublished).

Nanoinjection for Enhanced Intracellular Delivery in Mammalian Cells

Cell engineering is a major challenge for translational biomedical research. The key difficulty lies in manipulating cells to transform them without causing irreversible damage or loss of function. Traditional methods, such as viral vectors and BEP, have limitations, including cost, safety concerns, and impact on cell viability and functionality.− Recent advances in the nanoinjection platforms are addressing these challenges by generating new knowledge and opening up new possibilities in cellular manipulations.− With their unprecedented nanoscale resolution, NNs have demonstrated remarkable versatility in delivering diverse cargos into many cell types (including established cell lines, primary immune cells,− stem cells, and neural cells). Nanoinjection platforms are also facilitating promising applications in nanobiopsy, gene silencing, and immunomodulation. A central theme emerging from our recent nanoinjection studies is the facilitation of cargo delivery in its functional form within the cell interior. These studies have highlighted how different cell types respond to nanoinjection and how this knowledge can be harnessed for specific applications.

Conical Silicon NNs for Nucleic Acid Transfection

We used conical SiNN arrays (with length of 3.2 μm, diameter of 100 nm, and density of 0.3 μm–2) to deliver nucleic acids into adherent cell lines (GPE86, mouse embryonic fibroblasts), nonadherent cell lines (L1.2, mouse B cells; Jurkat, human T cells), and primary mouse T cells (Figure 4a). Using flow cytometry, the transfection efficiency was assessed by tracking fluorescence-tagged plasmids, and the expression of the reporter GFP within the cells that were detached from SiNN arrays. The results indicated that up to 25.4 ± 5.3% of L1.2 cells began to express GFP within 48 h, demonstrating successful transfection. Furthermore, we reported that SiNN-mediated nanoinjection can achieve a relatively high transfection efficiency of 30.7 ± 2.2% into primary mouse T cells (Figure 4b), particularly when T cell receptor (TCR) stimulation was absent. This finding is significant since it suggests that SiNN-mediated transfection is effective in hard-to-transfect primary immune T cells, even without the preactivation step that is normally required by conventional methods.

Polymeric NNs for Efficient mRNA Delivery

Besides SiNNs, we have used polymeric materials (PS, SU8, and PDMS) to generate polymeric NNs. These materials in their vertical configuration offer several advantages, including high cytocompatibility, ease of fabrication, optical transparency, and flexibility in chemical modifications. In a recent study, we reported that polymeric NNs can establish tight contact with cells and enable the delivery of mRNAs into both adherent and nonadherent cell types (49.4 ± 11% for GPE86 cells, and 12 ± 7% for L1.2 cells; Figure 4c, d). The successful nanoinjection via polymeric NNs could offer the potential to reduce the cost for nanofabrication and presents opportunities for integration of nanostructures into traditional polymeric cell cultureware for certain cellular manipulation.

Programmable NT Arrays for Precise Cargo Delivery

NT arrays offer several advantages over their solid NN counterparts. With their cylindrical shape and the central cavity, NTs can encapsulate various biomolecules, including IgG protein, mRNA, and ssDNA, without the requirement of surface functionalization (Figure 4e, f). The delivery efficiency can reach up to 80% with no significant impairment on cell viability or proliferation. NT arrays also offer control over the delivery or codelivery of cargos of interest (Figure 4g), including siRNA and Cas9 ribonucleoprotein (RNP) into GPE86 cells, silencing a TRIOBP gene and the knock down HPRT gene, respectively. Such capacity demonstrates the potential of NTs in mediating ex vivo gene manipulation (Figure 4h).

ENI Platform for Enhanced Intracellular Delivery

To further improve nanoinjection efficiency, we developed the ENI system by coupling NTs with EP. The electroactive NTs generated highly localized and uniform electric fields, allowing for transient pore formation in cell membranes at the point of contact with each NT (Figure 4i, j). The ENI has demonstrated its ability to precisely nanoelectroporate cells and efficiently deliver various membrane-impermeable cargos, including antibodies (62.5%), mRNA (55.5%), and pDNA (51.8%), while maintaining cell above 90% cell viability (Figure 3k). Additionally, gene silencing was achieved through siRNA delivery targeting the TRIOBP gene in GPE86 mouse fibroblasts, with an efficiency of 41.3% (Figure 4l), showcasing the platform’s versatility in intracellular delivery applications.

Mechanisms of Nanoinjection

Membrane Disruption

Access to the cell’s interior is typically achieved by disrupting or piercing the plasma membrane through mechanical, electrical (i.e., electroporation), optical, plasmonic,− acoustic, or a fusion of these methods. The various methods of nanoinjection interactions are illustrated in Figure 5a. Unassisted nanoinjection involves spontaneous penetration (cell piercing) of the membrane and NN-mediated endocytosis (Figure 5b; see Section 3.2). Alternatively, assisted nanoinjection uses physical methods (in our case, mechanical centrifugation and nanoelectroporation) to enhance membrane permeability.

Unassisted Nanoinjection (Nonforceful)

By using a specific combination of NN geometrical parameters and a particular type of adherent cells, along with their inherent cellular gravitational forces and their associated adhesive interactions, self-directed (spontaneous) penetration into cells can be achieved (Figure 5a (i) and 5b, c), but such occurrences are rare. Generally, this type of cell–NN interaction results in a modest level of delivery effectiveness and precision, and it tends to be poorly reproducible. Data from rigorous testing of the spontaneous penetration mechanism is still ambiguous; it has resulted in highlighting a unique set of combinations where assisted nanoinjection is more likely to occur. For example, for the four tested cell types (HEK293, HeLa, human dental pulp stem cells, and human foreskin fibroblast), medium heights (1.2–3.5 μm), small diameters (<400 nm), and NN densities between 0.6–1.0 NN μm–2 were associated with high transfection efficiency. We found that only a fraction of SiNN transversed the plasma membrane (Figure 5c), in agreement with other reports that penetration is a rare, stochastic event.

Assisted Nanoinjection (Forceful)

Assisted nanoinjection involves the application of active force, enhancing the delivery efficacy through an increased membrane permeability. This method can create temporary and reversible nanopores in the plasma membrane, facilitating increased cellular uptake. Our group has mainly focused on developing two types of assisted nanoinjection, mechanical nanoinjection (MNI, controlled by applying centrifugal force) and electroactive nanoinjection (ENI, controlled by coupling nanotubes with an electric field).

By exerting direct physical pressure on the cell membrane, MNI offers a straightforward route to improve the membrane penetration of NNs and the subsequent transport of the cargo of interest into the cell. This process amplifies the interfacial and gravitational forces acting between the NNs and cells that are weakly attached or in suspension (Figure 5a (ii)). The type of cells being targeted dictates the ideal centrifugal force and duration needed to optimize delivery and minimize potential cell damage and toxicity.

Alternatively, ENI achieves EP at the nanoscale, through a highly localized and uniform electric field, creating “holes” through the plasma membrane at the point of NT contact (Figure 5a (iii)). Optimizing the spatial and temporal precision with which the plasma membrane is nanoelectroporated can be achieved by manipulating two key parameters: (i) the specific topological parameters of the NTs; and (ii) the electrical parameters. Both parameters will determine the nanoinjection efficacy.

Nanoneedle-Enhanced Endocytosis

NNs can mediate three primary types of key biophysical stimuli at the cell membrane surface, including the modulation of membrane integrity (tension and permeability), protein clustering, and membrane curvature. Local interactions at the point of contact between NNs and cells can induce reorganization of curvature-sensing proteins (such as BAR domain proteins) and endocytic proteins (such as clathrin and caveolae proteins). By using specific NN topology and composition while applying controlled external forces—in our case, either mechanical or electrical forces—we were able to modulate membrane lipid raft reorganization and stimulate endocytosis, which are important for cargo internalization by the targeted cells (Figure 5d).

Using confocal microscopy, SEM, and TEM, we observed that NNs often induce membrane invagination, facilitating the formation of clathrin-coated pits and caveolae-like structures; this suggests the involvement of clathrin-mediated endocytosis (CME) and caveolae-mediated endocytosis (CavME) during nanoinjection. The formation of endocytic pits at the NN–cell interface significantly contributes to the uptake and internalization of cargos.

To validate the role of endocytosis during nanoinjection, we used two drug inhibitors—nystatin, hindering lipid rafts and caveolae, and chlorpromazine, known for impacting clathrin-mediated endocytosis—to treat GPE86 cells and investigate their impact on Cy5-mRNA-GFP delivery via SiNTs. The results showed that nystatin-treated GPE86 cells expressed significantly reduced Cy5 and GFP signals (3.1 ± 0.6%), compared to untreated (57.3 ± 2.8%) and chlorpromazine-treated (29.5 ± 9.7%) cells, indicating impaired mRNA uptake with inhibition of lipid rafts and caveolae formation (Figure 5e, f). Conversely, chlorpromazine did not notably impact cargo uptake, implying a lesser role of clathrin-mediated endocytosis in mRNA uptake facilitated by SiNTs. These findings indicate that inhibiting the lipid rafts can severely impair SiNT-mediated cargo delivery, highlighting the differential impacts of endocytosis inhibitors on cellular uptake mechanisms associated with SiNT nanoinjection.

The Role of Actin Cytoskeleton in Nanoinjection

Actin cytoskeletal components play a crucial role in the process of nanoinjection and NN-induced membrane disruption and endocytosis interfacing. We and others have observed that actin filaments are dynamically reorganized in response to cell–NN interactions. Particularly, the accumulation and repositioning of vinculin, a cytoskeletal protein associated with focal adhesions, along with actin-binding proteins, occur at the sites of NN–cell contact. Such actin rearrangement aids in stabilizing and reinforcing the NN–cell interface, promoting cellular adherence and facilitating the endocytic processes. Disruption or manipulation of actin dynamics affects the efficiency of nanoinjection, emphasizing the critical role of the actin cytoskeleton in the process.

We have investigated the role of the actin cytoskeleton in facilitating the intracellular delivery of biomacromolecules mediated by NT arrays, shedding light on its influence during the interaction of cells with silicon and polymer-based NTs. When GPE86 mouse fibroblasts interfaced with SiNTs, the actin cytoskeleton organization significantly impacted nanoinjection. Actin inhibition prior to SiNT interfacing considerably reduced mRNA delivery efficiency (17.2% for cytochalasin-D-treated cells and 33.1% for jasplakinolide-treated cells) compared to postinterfacing treatment (85.4% for cytochalasin D and 81.0% for jasplakinolide; Figure 5g, h). Similarly, for PSNT-mediated mRNA delivery, inducing actin cytoskeletal dysfunction within GPE86 cells prior PSNT-interfacing resulted in substantially reduced mRNA delivery efficiency (∼3% for cytochalasin D and ∼1% for jasplakinolide), contrasting with postinterface treatment (∼46% for cytochalasin D and ∼68% for jasplakinolide). These findings demonstrate the critical role of the actin cytoskeleton, particularly within the initial hours of cell–SiNT interaction, in facilitating efficient intracellular delivery.

Overall, our studies highlight the involvement and interplay among NNs, plasma membrane, endocytic elements, and actin cytoskeleton dynamics during nanoinjection process. Together, these factors significantly influence the efficiency of cargo delivery.

Nanoinjection for Ex Vivo Cell Engineering

CAR-T Cell Generation via Nanoinjection

The clinical success of engineering a patient’s cells with precision and efficiency ex vivo is now spurring the development of ways to generate CAR-T cells for future CAR-T cell technologies. Despite this, cell engineering remains a major challenge for translational biomedical research.

In current clinical-scale CAR-T cell manufacturing, conventional delivery methods—in particular, viral vectors and EP systems—are often restricted to specific cargo types and sizes, and usually can deliver only one cargo type at a time. The viral-based approach is exorbitant, involving complex production and slow manufacturing that render Phase 1 trials unattainable for small research centers and biotech companies. Whereas bulk EP often leads to increased therapeutic efficacy at the cost of high cell toxicity, leading to lower yield and functionality of CAR-T cells due to the administration of very high voltages. To address these challenges, we have used nanoinjection—MNI and ENI—as a nonviral platform to deliver CAR genes into primary mouse and human T cells (Figure 6a, b). For example, unlike BEP, ENI could offer a new route for delivery of a variety of genetic cargos—ranging from small to large CAR sizes and types, at substantially lower voltages, negligible cytotoxicity, and with much higher yield and function.

MNI arrays demonstrated successful delivery of PCR-expressing cassettes encoding anti-CD19-CAR into primary mouse T cells, achieving efficiencies of 20–37%, showing comparable or even higher delivery and expression efficiency compared to conventional BEP (Figure 6c, d). On the other hand, ENI, with the addition of localized electric field, demonstrated an almost 3-fold higher transfection efficiency compared to conventional BEP, achieving reporter GFP expression (43.3%) and effective suppression of lymphoma cell growth (86.9% cytotoxicity) upon coculturing with target lymphoma Raji cells. Importantly, these routes maintain high cell viability (>90%) postnanoinjection, ensuring the preservation of cellular functionality and expansion potential.

Characterization of CAR-T Cell Functionality

Characterizing CAR-T cells generated via nanoinjection provides vital insights into transfection efficiency, proliferation, cytokine production, and functional attributes, offering a window into the potential advantages of nanoinjection as an alternative delivery system to the viral method.

To investigate the role of activation status of T cells for CAR-T generation, we have compared the efficiency of CAR transfection in preactivated and nonactivated T cells using SiNTs and BEP. The results showed that preactivated T cells had higher Cy3 fluorescence and GFP levels (Figure 6c, d), indicating better CAR delivery and expression. However, nonactivated T cells had a greater division index after SiNT interfacing (Figure 6e), highlighting their potential for more effective expansion in therapeutic applications. Functional assessments by coculturing CAR-T cells with target lymphoma Raji cells showed that nonactivated T cells engineered by SiNTs exhibited the strongest antilymphoma responses at 72 h, with 96% cytotoxicity, surpassing BEP-generated cells and their activated counterparts (Figure 6f). Investigation into cytokine production revealed SiNT-engineered CAR-T cells derived from nonactivated T cells had sustained and elevated secretion of effector cytokines (IFN-γ, TNF-α; Figure 6g), contributing to their enhanced antitumor response.

Following the success of using SiNTs to produce antilymphoma CAR-T cells, our group has also investigated the use of an ENI platform. Unlike the “passive” SiNTs, which relied on the delivery of the GFP-CAR gene using mechanical cues (i.e., centrifugal force) into preactivated primary mouse T cells, the ENI platform combined nanoelectroporation with electroactive NTs to deliver CAR constructs into primary human T cells. Though direct comparison is difficult given the different cell source, using our new ENI platform, we achieved a 2-fold higher GFP-CAR gene delivery efficiency and a 1.5-fold higher GFP expression, with considerably lower impact on cell viability (75.4% in SiNTs compared to 90.1% in ENI). This higher cell viability could be explained by the significantly shorter interface time frame compared to the SiNTs (1 h compared to 6 h). Moreover, our ENI work used primary human T cells instead of primary mouse T cells (for SiNTs), which not only allowed for more relevant insights for clinical translation but also avoided the use of animal models.

In addition, the ENI platform outperformed BEP in transfection efficiency and CAR expression (43.3% compared to 16.3%) in primary human T cells. The ENI-generated CAR-T cells displayed a higher proliferation rate compared to BEP-engineered CAR-T cells, as evident by the normalized CTV intensity quantification to untreated CTV-stained cells (0.81 for BEP and 0.66 for the ENI platform, Figure 6h, i). Predictably, given the higher CAR gene expression, a significantly stronger antilymphoma efficacy compared to BEP was observed, as evident by the increased E:T ratios and decreased luminescence indicating enhanced cytotoxicity against Raji cells (8791.5 RLU for BEP and 4241.7 RLU for the ENI platform; the luciferase assay quantification at the 72-h mark, Figure 6j). In addition to the higher success rate in producing functional antilymphoma CAR-T cells, the ENI platform required 1000-fold lower CAR construct quantity compared to the BEP approach, which can be attributed to the ability to exploit the NT’s central cavity as reservoir for loading the targeted cargos; this can significantly reduce the cost of operation.

Confocal microscopy provided real-time insights into ENI-generated CAR-T cells’ interaction with Raji cells, showing rapid recognition, binding, and clustering around Raji cells, confirming the robust targeting ability of ENI-generated CAR-T cells and their effective suppression of lymphoma cells. Time-lapse recordings images confirmed ENI-generated CAR-T cells’ capability to recognize and induce apoptosis in Raji cells (Figure 6k).

To comprehensively characterize these engineered CAR-T cells for future studies, integrating gold-standard methods is imperative. Immunophenotyping through multiparametric flow cytometry remains pivotal for detailed assessment, while functional assays evaluating cytotoxicity, cytokine secretion, and effector functions are fundamental in assessing CAR-T cell efficacy.

Conclusion

We have consolidated existing knowledge of the biointerface design—the interaction between adherent, suspension cells, and NNs—for creating an effective nanoinjection platform. Our data suggests that silicon and polymeric NNs—in the forms of NNs, NTs, and their electroactive analogues—can influence intracellular delivery by efficiently negotiating the cell membrane. This emerging nanoinjection technology uses NNs to perturb cell membranes physically and transiently, enabling presentation of targeted cargos in their functional forms into individual cells without significant damage or alteration to a cell’s natural state.

At the core of nanoinjection lies the ability to efficiently modulate the biointerface design between NN arrays and targeted cellular systems. We have demonstrated the importance of strategic selection in nanoinjection methods—choosing between assisted and nonassisted approaches. Selecting the right device is critical for optimizing its interface with each targeted cell type, whether adherent or nonadherent. NN composition (polymeric or silicon) and NN array configurations must be considered for each application.

We have showcased how these bespoke NNs are now opening up new ways of manipulating immune cells ex vivo, giving them powerful new properties—including such functions as attacking certain cancer cells. Harnessing the power of this emerging technology will create a step change in the design of effective nanoinjection technology, greatly expanding the repertoire for future CAR-T cell manufacturing.

Author Contributions

The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript. C.C., A.R., N.H.V., and R.E. were responsible for the conceptualization. C.C., N.H.V., and R.E. were responsible for funding acquisition. C.C., A.R., and R.E. were responsible for acquisition of results. C.C., A.R., and R.E. were responsible for writing the original draft. C.C., A.R., N.H.V., and R.E. were responsible for reviewing and editing the manuscript. CRediT: Yaping Chen conceptualization, funding acquisition, investigation, resources, supervision, writing-original draft, writing-review & editing; Ali-Reza Shokouhi conceptualization, investigation, writing-original draft, writing-review & editing; Nicolas H. Voelcker conceptualization, funding acquisition, resources, supervision, writing-review & editing; Roey Elnathan conceptualization, funding acquisition, resources, supervision, writing-original draft, writing-review & editing.

The Australian Government (ARC FT project number: FT220100749) and the ARC Training Centre for Cell and Tissue Engineering Technologies (IC190100026).

The authors declare no competing financial interest.
