---
pmid: '38825990'
doi: 10.1002/cpt.3308
pmcid: ''
title: 'Clinical Pharmacology Strategies for Bispecific Antibody Development: Learnings
  from FDA-Approved Bispecific Antibodies in Oncology.'
authors:
- Lim KyoungSoo
- Zhu Xu Sue
- Zhou Diansong
- Ren Song
- Phipps Alex
journal: Clinical pharmacology and therapeutics
year: 2024
month: 8
volume: '116'
issue: '2'
pages: 315-327
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdfdirect/10.1002/cpt.3308
cited_by_count: 32
mesh_terms:
- Antibodies, Bispecific
- Humans
- United States
- United States Food and Drug Administration
- Drug Approval
- Neoplasms
- Dose-Response Relationship, Drug
- Drug Development
- Antineoplastic Agents, Immunological
- Pharmacology, Clinical
- Animals
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- bispecific-antibody
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: phase2-clinical
genes: []
drugs:
- BsAb
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Monoclonal and Polyclonal Antibodies Research
diseases_annotated: []
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 30
icite_rcr: 5.038832544208935
icite_percentile: 93.1
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Clinical Pharmacology Strategies for Bispecific Antibody Development: Learnings from FDA-Approved Bispecific Antibodies in Oncology.

## Abstract

Bispecific antibodies, by enabling the targeting of more than one disease-associated antigen or engaging immune effector cells, have both advantages and challenges compared with a combination of two different biological products. As of December 2023, there are 11 U.S. Food and Drug Administration-approved BsAb products on the market. Among these, 9 have been approved for oncology indications, and 8 of these are CD3 T-cell engagers. Clinical pharmacology strategies, including dose-related strategies, are critical for bispecific antibody development. This analysis reviewed clinical studies of all approved bispecific antibodies in oncology and identified dose-related perspectives to support clinical dose optimization and regulatory approvals, particularly in the context of the Food and Drug Administration's Project Optimus: (1) starting doses and dose ranges in first-in-human studies; (2) dose strategies including step-up doses or full doses for recommended phase 2 doses or dose level(s) used for registrational intent; (3) restarting therapy after dose delay; (4) considerations for the introduction of subcutaneous doses; (5) body weight vs. flat dosing strategy; and (6) management of immunogenicity. The learnings arising from this review are intended to inform successful strategies for future bispecific antibody development.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
