---
pmid: '38829727'
doi: 10.1021/acsnano.4c02947
pmcid: ''
title: Celecoxib Augments Paclitaxel-Induced Immunogenic Cell Death in Triple-Negative
  Breast Cancer.
authors:
- Qian Xiaohui
- Yang Huang
- Ye Ziqiang
- Gao Bingqiang
- Qian Zhefeng
- Ding Yuan
- Mao Zhengwei
- Du Yang
- Wang Weilin
journal: ACS nano
year: 2024
month: 6
volume: '18'
issue: '24'
pages: 15864-15877
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 54
mesh_terms:
- Triple Negative Breast Neoplasms
- Celecoxib
- Paclitaxel
- Animals
- Mice
- Immunogenic Cell Death
- Humans
- Female
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Mice, Inbred BALB C
- Liposomes
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs:
- CXB
- Celecoxib
- PGE2
- PTX
- Paclitaxel
- celecoxib
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Immunotherapy and Immune Responses
diseases_annotated: []
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 38
icite_rcr: 6.628220199888144
icite_percentile: 95.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Celecoxib Augments Paclitaxel-Induced Immunogenic Cell Death in Triple-Negative Breast Cancer.

## Abstract

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a highly aggressive malignancy that lacks effective targeted therapies. Inducing immunogenic cell death (ICD) in tumor cells represents a promising strategy to enhance therapeutic efficacy by promoting antitumor immunity. Paclitaxel (PTX), a commonly used chemotherapy drug for TNBC, can induce ICD; however, the resulting immunogenicity is limited. Thus, there is an urgent need to explore strategies that improve the effectiveness of ICD in TNBC by incorporating immunoregulatory agents. This study investigated the potential of celecoxib (CXB) to enhance PTX-induced ICD by blocking the biosynthesis of PGE2 in the tumor cells. We observed that the combination of CXB and PTX promoted the maturation of dendritic cells and primed a T cell-dependent immune response, leading to enhanced tumor rejection in a vaccination assay. To further optimize drug delivery in vivo, we developed cRGD-modified liposomes for the targeted codelivery of CXB and PTX. This delivery system significantly improved drug accumulation and triggered robust antitumor immunity in an orthotopic mouse model of TNBC. Moreover, it served as an in situ vaccine to inhibit tumor recurrence and lung metastasis. Overall, our findings provide in-depth insights into the therapeutic mechanism underlying the combination of CXB and PTX, highlighting their potential as effective immune-based therapies for TNBC.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
