---
pmid: '38909866'
doi: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2024.106571
pmcid: ''
title: 'Left out in the cold: Moving beyond hormonal therapy for the treatment of
  immunologically cold prostate cancer with CAR T cell immunotherapies.'
authors:
- Porter L H
- Harrison S G
- Risbridger G P
- Lister Natalie
- Taylor R A
journal: The Journal of steroid biochemistry and molecular biology
year: 2024
month: 10
volume: '243'
issue: ''
pages: '106571'
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsbmb.2024.106571
cited_by_count: 6
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Male
- Immunotherapy, Adoptive
- Receptors, Chimeric Antigen
- Tumor Microenvironment
- Prostatic Neoplasms
- Prostatic Neoplasms, Castration-Resistant
- T-Lymphocytes
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- car-t
- immunotherapy
cancer_types:
- prostate
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- CAR
- CAR T
- Chimeric Antigen Receptor
- androgen receptor
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: CAR-T cell therapy research
diseases_annotated: []
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 5
icite_rcr: 0.8942453618442303
icite_percentile: 46.1
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Left out in the cold: Moving beyond hormonal therapy for the treatment of immunologically cold prostate cancer with CAR T cell immunotherapies.

## Abstract

Prostate cancer is primarily hormone-dependent, and medical treatments have focused on inhibiting androgen biosynthesis or signaling through various approaches. Despite significant advances with the introduction of androgen receptor signalling inhibitors (ARSIs), patients continue to progress to castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), highlighting the need for targeted therapies that extend beyond hormonal blockade. Chimeric Antigen Receptor (CAR) T cells and other engineered immune cells represent a new generation of adoptive cellular therapies. While these therapies have significantly enhanced outcomes for patients with hematological malignancies, ongoing research is exploring the broader use of CAR T therapy in solid tumors, including advanced prostate cancer. In general, CAR T cell therapies are less effective against solid cancers with the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment hindering T cell infiltration, activation and cytotoxicity following antigen recognition. In addition, inherent tumor heterogeneity exists in patients with advanced prostate cancer that may prevent durable therapeutic responses using single-target agents. These barriers must be overcome to inform clinical trial design and improve treatment efficacy. In this review, we discuss the innovative and rationally designed strategies under investigation to improve the clinical translation of cellular immunotherapy in prostate cancer and maximise therapeutic outcomes for these patients.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
