---
pmid: '38916713'
doi: 10.1007/s11864-024-01197-1
pmcid: ''
title: Neoadjuvant Immunotherapy in Non-melanoma Skin Cancers of the Head and Neck.
authors:
- Ezzibdeh Rami
- Diop Mohamed
- Divi Vasu
journal: Current treatment options in oncology
year: 2024
month: 7
volume: '25'
issue: '7'
pages: 885-896
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 1
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Neoadjuvant Therapy
- Skin Neoplasms
- Head and Neck Neoplasms
- Immunotherapy
- Treatment Outcome
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Disease Management
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- mRNA-vaccine
cancer_types:
- melanoma
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- LAG-3
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nonmelanoma Skin Cancer Studies
diseases_annotated: []
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 1
icite_rcr: 0.16366792247114897
icite_percentile: 8.3
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Neoadjuvant Immunotherapy in Non-melanoma Skin Cancers of the Head and Neck.

## Abstract

Neoadjuvant immunotherapy will change the standard of care for advanced resectable cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) and possibly other non-melanoma skin cancers. With pathological complete response rates around 50% for cSCC in early studies, neoadjuvant therapy allows patients the possibility of significant reduction in tumor size, de-escalation of adjuvant therapy, and improved long-term outcomes. Patients must be carefully selected to ensure that there is a margin of safety with respect to resectability, such that if a tumor progresses on neoadjuvant therapy, there remains a curative surgical option that is acceptable to the patient. The optimal treatment paradigm is an area of active research, with many researchers questioning whether adjuvant therapy, or even local therapy, is necessary in patients who seem to have a complete response. The ability to predict who will respond will become even more critical to answer, as a significant number of patients do not want to risk their disease progressing, especially in cosmetically sensitive areas of the head and neck. Recent studies in melanoma show promise for improved response rates using combination therapies, and these strategies may apply to cSCC as well. The use of LAG-3 inhibitors or mRNA vaccine technology may further improve the utility of neoadjuvant strategies.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
