---
pmid: '39019409'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2024.189154
pmcid: ''
title: 'Reactive oxygen species of tumor microenvironment: Harnessing for immunogenic
  cell death.'
authors:
- Malla RamaRao
- Kumari Seema
- Ganji Swapna Priya
- Srilatha Mundla
- Nellipudi Haasita Reddy
- Nagaraju Ganji Purnachandra
journal: Biochimica et biophysica acta. Reviews on cancer
year: 2024
month: 9
volume: '1879'
issue: '5'
pages: '189154'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 32
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Tumor Microenvironment
- Reactive Oxygen Species
- Immunogenic Cell Death
- Neoplasms
- Immunotherapy
- Animals
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- ROS
- Reactive oxygen species
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Immune cells in cancer
diseases_annotated: []
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 30
icite_rcr: 4.645547071773296
icite_percentile: 92.1
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Reactive oxygen species of tumor microenvironment: Harnessing for immunogenic cell death.

## Abstract

The tumor microenvironment (TME) is a dynamic and complex system that undergoes continuous changes in its network architecture, notably affecting redox homeostasis. These alterations collectively shape a diverse ecosystem actively supporting tumor progression by influencing the cellular and molecular components of the TME. Despite the remarkable clinical advancements in cancer immunotherapy, its spectrum of clinical utility is limited by the altered TME and inadequate tumor immunogenicity. Recent studies have revealed that some conventional and targeted therapy strategies can augment the efficacy of immunotherapy even in patients with less immunogenic solid tumors. These strategies provoke immunogenic cell death (ICD) through the ROS-dependent liberation of damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs). These DAMPs recognize and bind with Pattern Recognition Receptors (PRRs) on immune cells, activating and maturing defense cells, ultimately leading to a robust antitumor immune response. The present review underscores the pivotal role of redox homeostasis in orchestrating the transition of TME from a cold to a hot phenotype and the ROS-ICD axis in immune response induction. Additionally, it provides up-to-date insights into strategies that leverage ROS generation to induce ICD. The comprehensive analysis aims to develop ROS-based effective cancer immunotherapies for less immunogenic tumors.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
