---
pmid: '39066856'
doi: 10.1007/s11864-024-01249-6
pmcid: ''
title: Systemic Management of Advanced Adrenocortical Carcinoma.
authors:
- Russell Jeffery S
journal: Current treatment options in oncology
year: 2024
month: 8
volume: '25'
issue: '8'
pages: 1063-1072
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 3
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Adrenocortical Carcinoma
- Disease Management
- Adrenal Cortex Neoplasms
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols
- Neoplasm Staging
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- Treatment Outcome
- Clinical Trials as Topic
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- CTLA-4
- PD(L)1
- PD1
- VEGF
drugs:
- EDP
- mitotane
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Adrenal and Paraganglionic Tumors
diseases_annotated: []
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 4
icite_rcr: 1.084386514890092
icite_percentile: 53.2
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Systemic Management of Advanced Adrenocortical Carcinoma.

## Abstract

Adrenocortical cancer (ACC) is a rare and aggressive disease. Surgery has traditionally been the primary treatment for locally advanced disease with ongoing controversy around the optimal neoadjuvant and adjuvant treatment options. Unfortunately, local recurrence and the eventual development of metastatic disease is common and five-year survival rates are poor. While many trials have evaluated novel systemic agents to treat advanced adrenocortical cancer, only a few drugs have demonstrated any response at all. To date, only one drug, mitotane, is approved in the US for ACC and no regimen has clearly shown an increase in overall survival. In advanced metastatic or unresectable disease, data supports the first line regimen of EDP chemotherapy + mitotane as the primary treatment modality. In the second line, while data is limited, we would recommend consideration of immunotherapy using a PD(L)1 agent combined with a TKI/VEGF inhibitor or combination immunotherapy with PD1/CTLA-4 drugs. In all cases, we always prefer a clinical trial as available. This article reviews data from multiple studies evaluating novel systemic agents against ACC and discusses current systemic therapy combinations and ongoing clinical trials.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
