---
pmid: '39141161'
doi: 10.1007/s10238-024-01460-7
pmcid: PMC11324771
title: 'Strategies for treating the cold tumors of cholangiocarcinoma: core concepts
  and future directions.'
authors:
- Zhang GuanBo
- Li JinSong
- Li Gang
- Zhang Jie
- Yang Zhi
- Yang Lin
- Jiang ShiJie
- Wang JiaXing
journal: Clinical and experimental medicine
year: 2024
month: 8
volume: '24'
issue: '1'
pages: '193'
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s10238-024-01460-7.pdf
cited_by_count: 10
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Cholangiocarcinoma
- Immunotherapy
- Tumor Microenvironment
- Bile Duct Neoplasms
- Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cholangiocarcinoma and Gallbladder Cancer Studies
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 6
icite_rcr: 0.9728946510368857
icite_percentile: 49.2
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Strategies for treating the cold tumors of cholangiocarcinoma: core concepts and future directions.

## Abstract

Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a rare type of digestive tract cancer originating from the epithelial cells of the liver and biliary tract. Current treatment modalities for CCA, such as chemotherapy and radiation therapy, have demonstrated limited efficacy in enhancing survival rates. Despite the revolutionary potential of immunotherapy in cancer management, its application in CCA remains restricted due to the minimal infiltration of immune cells in these tumors, rendering them cold and unresponsive to immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs). Cancer cells within cold tumors deploy various mechanisms for evading immune attack, thus impeding clinical management. Recently, combination immunotherapy has become increasingly essential to comprehend the mechanisms underlying cold tumors to enhance a deficient antitumor immune response. Therefore, a thorough understanding of the knowledge on the combination immunotherapy of cold CCA is imperative to leverage the benefits of immunotherapy in treating patients. Moreover, gut microbiota plays an essential role in the immunotherapeutic responses in CCA. In this review, we summarize the current concepts of immunotherapy in CCA and clarify the intricate dynamics within the tumor immune microenvironment (TIME) of CCA. We also delve into the evasion mechanisms employed by CCA tumors against the anti-tumor immune responses. The context of combination immunotherapies in igniting cold tumors of CCA and the critical function of gut microbiota in prompting immune responses have also been annotated. Furthermore, we have proposed future directions in the realm of CCA immunotherapy, aiming to improve the clinical prognosis of CCA patients.

## Full Text

Strategies for treating the cold tumors of cholangiocarcinoma: core concepts and future directions

Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a rare type of digestive tract cancer originating from the epithelial cells of the liver and biliary tract. Current treatment modalities for CCA, such as chemotherapy and radiation therapy, have demonstrated limited efficacy in enhancing survival rates. Despite the revolutionary potential of immunotherapy in cancer management, its application in CCA remains restricted due to the minimal infiltration of immune cells in these tumors, rendering them cold and unresponsive to immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs). Cancer cells within cold tumors deploy various mechanisms for evading immune attack, thus impeding clinical management. Recently, combination immunotherapy has become increasingly essential to comprehend the mechanisms underlying cold tumors to enhance a deficient antitumor immune response. Therefore, a thorough understanding of the knowledge on the combination immunotherapy of cold CCA is imperative to leverage the benefits of immunotherapy in treating patients. Moreover, gut microbiota plays an essential role in the immunotherapeutic responses in CCA. In this review, we summarize the current concepts of immunotherapy in CCA and clarify the intricate dynamics within the tumor immune microenvironment (TIME) of CCA. We also delve into the evasion mechanisms employed by CCA tumors against the anti-tumor immune responses. The context of combination immunotherapies in igniting cold tumors of CCA and the critical function of gut microbiota in prompting immune responses have also been annotated. Furthermore, we have proposed future directions in the realm of CCA immunotherapy, aiming to improve the clinical prognosis of CCA patients.

Introduction

Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a lethal malignancy originating from the epithelial cells of the liver and biliary tract, which constitutes approximately 3% of all tumors in the digestive system. Histopathologically, this malignancy is identified by the distinct differentiation features of cholangiocytes, the epithelial cells that form the lining of both intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts. CCA is principally categorized into extrahepatic CCA (eCCA) and intrahepatic CCA (iCCA). Additionally, eCCA is further subdivided into two types: distal CCA (dCCA) and perihilar CCA (pCCA). CCA represents a diverse group of malignancies without exhibiting a specific phenotype or molecular signature. Substantial evidence has suggested that the heterogeneity of CCA arises from a complex interplay between the host-specific genetic background and the geographically varied distribution of associated risk factors. These risk factors predominantly include conditions such as metabolic disorders, hepatitis B or C infections, heavy alcohol consumption, and hepatic fluorosis. Its incidence is rising in multiple countries worldwide. Due to its high lethality, with a 5-year overall survival (OS) rate of less than 20%, this disease has garnered significant scientific and clinical attention. Moreover, CCA is universally featured by clinical aggressiveness and limited treatment options. A few CCA patients in the early or pre-invasive stages only represent several non-specific symptoms such as fatigue, jaundice, weight loss, and abdominal pain, which are typically vague and may impede the disease diagnosis. Due to the lack of significant symptoms, CCA is most frequently diagnosed at the advanced stage, when potentially curative treatments such as surgical resection are no longer viable. The efficacy of systemic treatments including chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and locoregional therapy remains limited, underscoring the urgent need for novel therapeutic agents for this fatal disease. Advancements in genetic profiling and classification, along with targeted therapies, have the potential to enhance survival rates for patients suffering from this otherwise devastating malignancy. Actionable genetic alterations, which are defined as mutations associated with US FDA-approved targeted therapies for any indication, identified in CCA include isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) 1/2, BRAF, and fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR). Ivosidenib (AG-120), an oral inhibitor targeting mutant IDH1, has been investigated in a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase III trial known as ClarIDHy, which has significantly improved patient survival compared to the control group. Moreover, in a study involving eight patients with BRAF V600-mutated CCA, treatment with the oral BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib resulted in a partial response in one patient. FGFR signaling plays essential roles in numerous physiological processes, promoting cell proliferation, growth, and survival. Consequently, this pathway is vulnerable to exploitation by cancer cells including CCA. Futibatinib, a third selective FGFR inhibitor, covalently and irreversibly binds to the P-loop cysteine residue in the FGFR kinase domain. In a phase II study involving patients with previously treated advanced-stage FGFR2-rearranged iCCA, futibatinib achieved an objective response rate (ORR) of 41.7%, with a median duration of response lasting 9.7 months. The genetic profiling studies mentioned earlier have demonstrated that mutations in epigenetic regulators, including IDH1, IDH2, BAP1, and ARID1A, are frequently observed in CCAs. Therefore, epigenetic therapies represent a promising avenue of exploration. Preliminary findings from a phase III trial of AG-120 (NCT02073994), an inhibitor targeting mutant IDH1, showed a remarkably therapeutic response and favorable safety profile in patients with CCA harboring IDH1 mutations. Additionally, cannabinoids, such as cannabidiol (CBD) and cannabigerol (CBG), have been demonstrated to inhibit CCA growth by several cell death pathways, although awaiting further exploration in clinical settings. This body of clinical evidence, combined with the epidemiological observation of increasing incidence and mortality rates, identifies CCA as a significant global health concern.

The emergence of immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) has marked groundbreaking changes in cancer treatment, leading to substantial transformations in the therapeutic approaches to the disease.. However, the use of ICIs in treating CCA has only provided limited benefits. Unlike cancers such as melanoma, and lung cancer, which can remarkably respond to immunotherapy. CCA is characterized by deficient T-cell infiltration, resulting in an immunologically “cold” tumor, a characteristic that significantly hampers the efficacy of ICIs, as the restoration of T-cell function is crucial for the successful application of ICI therapy. Moreover, CCA displays reduced antigenicity and immunogenicity, which collectively contribute to the limitations of ICI monotherapy in treating iCCA. Recent advancements have highlighted combination strategies as a promising approach. Specifically, combining ICIs with current therapeutic modalities such as chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and targeted therapy has demonstrated encouraging results in improving the prognosis of patients with CCA in the clinical setting. Remarkably, combining strategies including ICCs have shown the potential to resensitize tumors to chemotherapy that were resistant to gemcitabine and cisplatin (NCT03311789), which uncovers that combination strategies with ICIs hold immense potential for treating this cold tumor. Besides, gut microbiota exerts an essential impact on the immune regulation and cancer progression of CCAs, which serves as a potential strategy for treating CCAs.

In this review, we delve into the underlying mechanisms that contribute to the cold immune phenotype of CCA, elucidating the precise immune evasion mechanisms and characteristics of the tumor immune microenvironment (TIME) in these tumors. Furthermore, feasible strategies have been proposed for redefining CCAs with enhanced immunogenicity. These endeavors are aiming to broaden the range of immunotherapy and introduce novel therapeutic strategies to augment the effectiveness of immunotherapy in CCA.

Current strategies for immunotherapy in CCAs

Immune checkpoint inhibitors

ICIs are at the forefront of tumor immunotherapy. They have been explored for tumor treatment due to their extensive biological activity in various tumor types and the durability of their responses. The advent of ICIs has pioneered a new therapeutic pathway for effective cancer treatment. Of the checkpoint blockade strategies, the most prominent ones involve inhibiting cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA-4) and disrupting the interaction between programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) and programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1). The use of ICIs in CCAs is currently under extensive investigation. A multicenter retrospective study was performed to assess the efficiency of ICIs in patients with advanced CCA who were resistant to GP (cisplatin and gemcitabine) chemotherapy. This research included 51 patients who tested positive for PD-L1 following progressive disease after failure to GP first-line chemotherapy. This study reported an ORR of 9.8% and an overall survival (OS) of 6.9 months. Toxicity was manageable in these studies, suggesting the safe application in the clinical setting. A subsequent phase II clinical trial using nivolumab included 54 participants and indicated an ORR of 11%, along with a median progression-free survival (mPFS) of 3.68 months. Additionally, several other ICIs are currently undergoing validation, including CDX-527 (NCT04440943) and tebotelimab (NCT03219268). The specifics of these clinical trials are summarized in Table 1. 

Cancer vaccines

Therapeutic cancer vaccines represent a rapidly evolving tool in cancer treatment, which have experienced a remarkable revitalization in recent years. By stimulating the patient’s immune defense system to boost immunogenicity and trigger anti-tumor immune responses, these vaccines have been developed aiming to impede the advancement of malignancies. This strategy is gaining traction as a highly encouraging approach in therapeutics. For CCA, the in vitro experiment conducted by Noda et al. demonstrated that immunizing with dendritic cells (DCs) loaded with aspartate-β-hydroxylase has exerted significant antitumor effects, presenting a promising therapeutic vaccine. mRNA-based tumor vaccines are considered a focal point in the realm of CCA immunotherapy. mRNA vaccines have demonstrated the potential to improve anti-tumor responses in different types of cancer by offering easier modification and an adjustable half-life. In the context of CCA, CD247, TRRAP and FCGR1A hold immense potential for developing mRNA vaccines.

Currently, two specific antigens related to malignant progression play a pivotal role in the therapeutic vaccines of CCA: Wilms’ tumor gene antigen (WT1) and mucin 1 (MUC1). MUC1 peptide vaccination has been demonstrated to be safe; however, further investigation is still required. A study examining the incorporation of gemcitabine and a WT1 single-antigen vaccine in a cohort of eight participants with advanced CCA showcased the modest safety and effectiveness of this combined treatment regimen, with adverse events comparable to those typically observed. Furthermore, a clinical trial involving a tetrapeptide vaccine in a group of nine patients with advanced CCA reported that 78% of patients exhibited specific T-cell responses. Consequently, the mPFS was 5.2 months, and the median OS was 12.7 months, indicating an improved prognosis. Other clinical trials are listed in Table 1.

Adoptive cell immunotherapy

Adoptive cell therapy (ACT) involves genetically modifying T cells to express a chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) or T cell receptor (TCR) and has achieved profound therapeutic effects on diverse cancer types (Fig. 1). In the case of CCA, a potential therapeutic target is MUC1 and a fourth-generation CAR-T cell comprising anti-MUC1 domains has been deployed, which exerts remarkably anti-tumor effects. Furthermore, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) may serve as another target for CAR-T cell therapy of CCA. In a phase I clinical trial conducted by Feng and colleagues, 11 advanced CCA patients harboring HER2 mutation received chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide and paclitaxel and were subsequently treated with HER2-targeted CAR-T cells. The results showed moderate efficacy, with one patient achieving a partial response and five patients demonstrating stable disease. Additionally, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is frequently upregulated and linked to disease progression and unfavorable prognosis in CCA, which holds immense potential for CAR-T therapy. In a phase I study enrolling CCA patients harboring EGFR mutations, the efficacy of CAR-modified T cells was assessed. Out of the 14 evaluable CCA patients, one achieved a complete response, and eight showed stable disease. Nevertheless, additional investigations are needed to validate the safety and effectiveness of this treatment due to the toxicity and endothelial damage linked to CAR-T cell therapy. Furthermore, allogeneic γδ T-cell therapy has demonstrated the ability to boost immune responses, reduce the size of impacted lymph nodes, and extend the survival period in a patient experiencing recurrent CCA following liver transplantation. Besides, tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and cytokine-induced killer (CIK) cells also exhibit positive effects on CCA patients. A clinical trial investigating the use of TILs in patients harboring mutations in the ERBB2-interacting protein has demonstrated a notable inhibition of CCA. A Phase II clinical trial evaluating the effectiveness and safety of TIL cell therapy in 59 individuals with advanced biliary tract cancer (BTC) is currently underway. The findings from this study will be released upon its completion (NCT03801083). Additionally, further ongoing trials related to ACT are detailed in Table 1.

The cold tumor immune microenvironment of CCA

CCAs are featured by their dense, desmoplastic nature and prominent stroma, which contains abundant cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) as well as innate and adaptive immune cells, among other stromal cells, which can play either tumor-promoting or tumor-suppressive roles in disease progression, depending on the different disease stages. Immune infiltration is a crucial factor that influences the immune response, as evidenced by accumulating clinical evidence. The primary framework for classifying the immunophenotypes of the tumor microenvironment comprises three defined phenotypes including immune-desert, immune-excluded, and immune-inflamed. These distinct immunophenotypes define the immune response to ICIs, out of which the immune-desert or immune-excluded tumor phenotypes are referred to collectively as cold tumors that represent low response rates to ICIs. Studies have shown that the immune-desert phenotype is present in around 45% of cases of CCA, confirming the cold tumor immunophenotype. In these cold TIMEs, there are extensive crosstalk between multiple stromal and suppressive immune components including CAFs, tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), tumor-associated neutrophils (TANs) and regulatory T (Treg) cells . Mouse models of CCA have underscored the interdependency and network interactions among various immunosuppressive cells. In these models, therapeutic targeting of TAMs through inhibition of the macrophage colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor did not lead to improved outcomes. This was attributed to a compensatory rise in myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), which was triggered by heightened levels of the MDSC-recruiting chemokine C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 2 (CXCL2) secreted by cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs). Furthermore, PD-1 expression is predominantly observed in CD3 + cells, while being almost non-existent in CD68 + TAM cells, indicating a potential insufficiency of PD-1-positive TAMs. The progression toward immunosuppression is further highlighted by the elevated levels of FOXP3 + Treg cells in human CCA when comparing tumor tissue to non-tumor tissue. Furthermore, an elevated ratio of FOXP3 + to CD8 + cells has been linked to decreased survival rates. This body of evidence collectively supports the claim that the majority of CCAs demonstrate features that are characteristic of cold tumors, characterized by impaired antitumor immune responses (Fig. 2).

The immune evasion mechanisms defined CCAs as cold tumors

The TIMEs of cold CCAs are distinguished by limited T-cell infiltration, reduced HLA-I expression, and decreased antigenicity. These characteristics promote the immune evasion mechanisms of cold tumors. As a result, both the quantity and functionality of T cells within cold tumors are reduced, leading to a suboptimal response to immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs). Gaining insights into the mechanisms underlying immune evasion is essential for the advancement of novel immunotherapy approaches designed to stimulate cold CCAs. This section explores how CCAs utilize these strategies to exhibit a cold tumor phenotype. (Fig. 3).

Decencies in T-cell infiltration

Before eliminating cancer cells, immune cells need to infiltrate tumor sites and penetrate into the parenchyma. Any disruption in this intricate, multi-step process may lead to insufficient T-cell infiltration, ultimately compromising the efficacy of immunotherapy. The chemotactic process, which facilitates the recruitment of T cells into tumor tissues. CXCL9 produced by DCs and TAMs functioned as the amplifier that mediated the chemotactic process. Notably, the absence of CXCL9 in iCCA tissues has been implicated in the exclusion of T cells. Tumor is featured by irregular, expanded and disorganized morphologies of blood vessels. During the migration of effector T cells, newly formed tumor blood vessels hinder their extravasation. In the context of CCA, thrombospondin (THBS)1, THBS2, and pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) are increased in the extracellular fluid, leading to the inhibition of vascular morphogenesis and viability. Notably, the downregulation of cell adhesion molecules, including intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM1) and vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM1), in CCA impedes T-cell trafficking.

Extracellular matrix desmoplasia is the hallmark of the TIME within CCAs, which is manifested by the elevated levels of collagen fiber along with decreased elastic and reticular fiber expression, leading to impeded T-cell infiltration and poor immunotherapeutic responses. And during cancer progression, numerous ECM proteins experience significant dysregulation, leading to biochemical alterations within the tumor stromal environment, establishing a physical barrier, which further contributes to the inhibition of T-cell infiltration. These traits promote poor therapeutic responses in the immunotherapy of CCA.

Decencies in antigenicity

Somatic mutations in cancer cells can lead to the formation of neoantigens, making them potentially recognizable by the immune system. Significantly, tumors with a higher neoantigen burden typically exhibit an increased somatic mutation burden. These mutations can result in altered amino acids that improve T-cell binding to HLA molecules, thereby initiating T-cell responses. The tumor mutation burden (TMB) is defined as the quantification of somatic mutations per megabase of genomic DNA. Essentially, the TMB is an indicator of the neoantigen load within the tumor. Accumulating evidence suggests that cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is characterized by a low TMB, with only a modest 52.0% of clonal neoantigens being expressed in CCA. Comprehensive whole-exome RNA sequencing has uncovered that the loss of clonal neoantigen copy numbers and the silencing of mutated genes that harbor neoantigens are commonly observed in these cold tumors.

Combination immunotherapies provoke immune responses in CCAs

Cold tumors, characterized by a low immunoscore, pose significant challenges for eradication and are frequently associated with poor prognosis. A proposed strategy to overcome the absence of a pre-existing immune response—and to transition cold tumors into hot tumors—entails the use of current therapies combined with ICIs that augment the immunogenicity of immunologically cold tumors, thereby potentiating the efficacy of immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) and generating synergistic effects. The integration of chemotherapy and immunotherapy for the treatment of CCAs has demonstrated promising outcomes with respect to patient survival and prognosis. In this section, we will discuss the current advancements in combination immunotherapies in CCAs.

Radiotherapy combined with immunotherapy

In recent years, radiotherapy has garnered significant interest as a potential candidate for improving immunotherapeutic effects.. A growing body of preclinical evidence suggests that radiotherapy can exert immunostimulatory effects. Irradiation enhances the expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules and promotes the presentation of novel antigenic determinants on the tumor cells, enhancing their susceptibility to T-cell recognition. Furthermore, radiotherapy induces a highly immunostimulatory program of cell death, commonly referred to as immunogenic cell death (ICD). This process can release various damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) and secret numerous immunostimulatory chemotactic cytokines, including type I interferons (IFNs) and CXCL10 within the TIME, which activates the proliferation and differentiation of naive T cells. Subsequently, these DAMPs serve as tumor-associated antigens, which are presented by dendritic cells (DCs), thereby stimulating immune cell trafficking and facilitating the cytotoxic effects mediated by CD8 + T cells, ultimately leading to the eradication of both primary and distant tumors. These processes may promote achieving systemic tumor control via the phenomenon known as the ‘abscopal effect’.

Emerging evidence has revealed that radiotherapy in combination with ICCs holds immense potential for eliminating tumor cells of CCA. For example, a recent clinical trial has evaluated the safety and efficacy of radiotherapy combined with anti-PD-1 antibody immunotherapy in unresectable iCCA patients. This study reported the median PFS was 12.0 months, while the median OS was 22.0 months. The ORR stood at 61.1%, and the disease control rate (DCR) was 86.1%. Furthermore, this combination strategy exhibited low toxicity levels in patients. Multiple case reports also demonstrated the promising potential of anti-PD-1 immunotherapy combined with radiotherapy as a treatment approach. Liu et al. documented the case of a 68-year-old patient with iCCA who achieved a notable response after receiving anti-PD-1 immunotherapy (pembrolizumab) in combination with radiotherapy. Zhao et al. reported four cases involving patients with advanced CCAs who successfully controlled tumor progression through the combination of anti-PD-1 antibodies and stereotactic body radiotherapy. Moreover, other clinical trials are ongoing, which might promote the clinical application of radiotherapy in combination with ICCs.

Chemotherapy combined with immunotherapy

Historically, cytotoxic chemotherapy using the regime of GP has been established as the standard first-line therapy for advanced BTC patients, as demonstrated by the findings of the ABC-02 study. Genotoxic chemotherapies have the potential to induce mutations, leading to the generation of neoantigens, and thus increasing antigenicity. Nevertheless, chemotherapies can also induce ICD, which simultaneously enhances adjuvanticity by releasing DAMPs and facilitating the transfer of antigens to DCs. Additionally, dying tumor cells can initiate a toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3)-dependent IFN response, leading to the local production of CXCL10, which attracts T cells and memory T cells to the TIME, which further amplify the immune responses.

The landmark TOPAZ-1 trial was a multicenter, randomized phase III study designed to evaluate the efficacy of GP with or without the addition of durvalumab in patients with previously untreated, advanced BTC. The addition of durvalumab resulted in a median OS of 12.8 months, compared to 11.5 months in the control group. Specifically, the one-year OS was 54.1% versus 48.0%, along with the two-year OS was 25.0% versus 10.4%. The Keynote-966 study also assessed a similar hypothesis by incorporating pembrolizumab into the GP chemotherapy regimen. The median OS was 12.7 months in the pembrolizumab group compared to 10.9 months in the placebo group, which provided further evidence of the antitumor efficacy of anti-PD-L1 antibodies when combined with a backbone of established cytotoxic chemotherapy in BTC. Markedly, a study of 38 patients with advanced BTC demonstrated that the combination of camrelizumab, gemcitabine, and oxaliplatin resulted in a median OS of 11.8 months. There are multiple ongoing clinical trials that assess the efficacy of adding ICI immunotherapy into chemotherapy regime.

Targeted therapy combined with immunotherapy

In recent years, with the advancement of gene detection technology, the molecular pathology of CCA has been increasingly elucidated, making precision oncology a promising approach for the treatment of CCA. It has been found that up to 70% of iCCA cases harbor at least one targetable gene mutation. To target these mutations, commonly used drugs including FGFR2 inhibitors and isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) inhibitors have been developed. A phase II clinical study investigated the efficacy of a novel triplet regimen comprising a PD-1 inhibitor (toripalimab), a targeted agent (lenvatinib), and GEMOX as a first-line treatment for advanced iCCA patients, achieving notable responses. Notably, the ORR achieved was as high as 80%, and the DCR reached an impressive 93.3%. Furthermore, data presented at the 2023 Gastrointestinal Cancers Symposium from the Phase II IMbrave 151 trial (NCT04677504) suggested that, in patients with advanced CCA, treatment with or without bevacizumab in combination with atezolizumab and cisplatin plus gemcitabine (CisGem) demonstrated modest clinical benefits. These findings suggest that drug combinations may offer greater clinical benefits. Other ongoing clinical trials are also summarized.

Gut microbiota and CCA: a promising strategy for immunotherapy

Gut microbiota is essential for the development of a functional immune system. The symbiotic relationship between gut microbiota and the human body plays a diverse role in molding the immune responses of the human host; for example, the presence of segmented filamentous bacterium is adequate to stimulate the emergence of T helper (Th) 17 cells that secrete interleukin (IL)-17 and IL-22 in the lamina propria, which also associated with upregulated expression of genes related to inflammation and antimicrobial defenses, leading to improved resilience against the intestinal pathogens. The interaction between the immune system and microorganisms in cancer can take place at mucosal surfaces, systemically through microbial metabolites and outer membrane vesicles, or locally within lymphoid organs and the TIME. Microbial signals from both proximal and distal sources can impact innate and adaptive immune responses, thereby affecting immunosurveillance and treatment-induced immune responses.

The gut microbiota has been extensively recognized as a potential supplement to enhance the efficacy of immunotherapy. Numerous studies have investigated the correlation between microbiome compositions and the efficacy of immunotherapy, identifying several bacterial species as potential biomarkers in various types of cancer. An important link involves the induction of Enterococcus gallinarum translocation after cyclophosphamide administration, resulting in the development of Th17 cell responses and the generation of IFN-producing CD8-T effector cells. This coordinated immune response efficiently suppresses tumor progression in sarcoma and lung adenocarcinoma models. Moreover, the presence of Faecalibacterium could increase the number of effector T cells including CD4 and CD8 T cells that have also been linked to responsiveness to ICIs and improved prognosis in various cancers, including kidney cancer, lung cancer and melanoma. Another investigation focused on melanoma patients who exhibited positive responses to a combination of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated antigen-4 (CTLA-4) and PD-1 blockade revealed an enrichment of specific bacterial taxa such as Bacteroides stercoris, Parabacteroides distasonis, and Fournierella massiliensis. This evidence has highlighted the essential role of gut microbiota in amplifying immunotherapeutic efficiencies.

Research on intratumoral bacteria in patients with CCA is sparse and potentially hindered by technical limitations, such as sample contamination during collection, which is particularly challenging and can result in biases. Chai et al. employed 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis to quantify the bacteria in the tumor tissues of iCCA patients, which revealed that Paraburkholderia fungorum exerted significant anti-tumor effects against iCCAs through regulating glutamate metabolism. Increased levels of Lactobacillus, Actinomyces, Peptostreptococcaceae, and Alloscardovia were observed in iCCA patients. Dangtakot and colleagues analyzed the microbiota in bile fluid from 30 patients with CCAs. They discovered that Enterobacter, Pseudomonas, and Stenotrophomonas species were notably more prevalent in bile samples from patients with CCAs in comparison with those with choledocholithiasis. Similar findings were reported in a study involving 28 patients with eCCA, where Enterococcus, Streptococcus, Bacteroides, Klebsiella, and Pyramidobacter were the most prevalent in bile. In two different mouse models of primary sclerosing cholangitis, a reduction in intestinal barrier function was documented, facilitating the translocation of gut-derived bacteria and lipopolysaccharides into the liver. Consequently, this triggered the upregulation of CXCL1 expression in hepatocytes via a TLR4-dependent mechanism, leading to the accumulation of CXCR2 + polymorphonuclear myeloid-derived suppressor cells (PMN-MDSCs). These PMN-MDSCs inhibited antitumor immune responses in the liver and facilitated the growth of cholangiocarcinoma in mice. A small-sample study comprising a cohort of 30 patients with CCA revealed that baseline gut microbiome diversity is correlated with a favorable response to anti-PD-1 antibody therapy in individuals with hepatobiliary cancers. Cumulatively, these results propose that the composition of the gut microbiome is pivotal in influencing the immunosuppressive milieu of the liver and promoting the progression of cholangiocarcinoma. The potential implications of microbiome-targeted approaches on the immunotherapy of CCA necessitate comprehensive exploration. While these approaches may offer opportunities to boost immune vigilance, the potential for unintended consequences, such as exacerbating inflammation or undermining the effectiveness of current immunotherapies, demands meticulous assessment.

Conclusions and perspectives

A considerable number of CCA patients demonstrate poor responses to ICI blockade therapy, largely attributed to the “cold” immune phenotype. This comprehensive review delineates the factors contributing to the suboptimal immune responses in CCA, encompassing immune evasion mechanisms and characteristics of the TIME. Additionally, the study delves into therapeutic strategies that could induce biological alterations to address the cold phenotype in CCA. The rationale for integrating radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy with immunotherapy has been validated, given their potential to enhance the immunogenicity of cold tumors, thereby augmenting the effectiveness of ICIs and producing synergistic effects. Recent combined immunotherapies for CCA have shown promising results in terms of patient survival prognosis. Further investigation is imperative to evaluate the efficacy and safety profile of these combination immunotherapies.

Customized combination therapies, directed by immune profiling and other predictive biomarkers, within a unified framework encompassing genomic, transcriptomic, immune, and microbiome data, have the capacity to improve patient stratification for combined treatments. In patients with cold tumors, the indiscriminate conversion process is expensive, time-intensive, and inefficient. Hence, the development of dependable biomarkers for identifying individuals with cold CCAs is imperative. The development of liquid biopsy provides a promising strategy for real-time biomarker identification within the TIME of CCAs. Through the elucidation of the fundamental mechanisms of immunotherapy responses at the single-cell level, single-cell analysis sequencing technologies have shown promise in identifying biomarkers for predicting responses to immunotherapy.

IDH1/2 mutations are linked to cold iCCAs. Paradoxically, a separate study revealed that patients with IDH1/2 mutations showed enhanced T-cell infiltration, possibly attributed to the concomitant presence of hepatitis B virus infection and neoantigenicity. While IDH1/2 shows promise in predicting the phenotype of iCCAs, further comprehensive studies are warranted to validate additional biomarkers. Carapeto and colleagues conducted gene sequencing analysis on iCCA samples and observed a correlation between BRCA1-Associated Protein 1 (BAP1) and immune checkpoint markers. BAP1 mutation samples exhibited increased expression of immunosuppressive checkpoint markers B7H3 and B7H4. Recent findings indicate that patients with KMT2D mutations may derive potential benefits from immunotherapy by modulating inflammatory activity in iCCA. These findings have revealed that several biomarkers hold immense potential for the immunotherapy of CCAs.

The gut microbiota plays a critical role in the progression of CCA. Moreover, it exerts critical impacts on the immunotherapy of CCA. Chen et al. investigated the genetic correlation between gut microbiota and CCA. Their study reveals that a higher genetically predicted abundance of the Eubacterium nodatum group, Ruminococcus torques group, Coprococcus, Dorea, and the phylum Actinobacteria was linked to a reduced risk of CCA. Conversely, an increased risk of intrahepatic CCA was associated with a higher abundance of the Veillonellaceae family, Alistipes genus, Enterobacterales order, and the Firmicutes phylum. Another emerging approach for modulating gut microbiota is fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT), which involves transferring the complete fecal microbial community—including bacteria, viruses, fungi, and their metabolites—from a healthy donor to a recipient. It has been recognized as a potential therapeutic strategy for restoring microbial balance in various gastrointestinal disorders. However, there are currently no clinical trials assessing the benefits of FMT for gut microbiota modulation in the prevention and treatment of CCA, which represents future directions. Future prospective studies should focus on determining whether variations in microbiome diversity and composition are associated with immunotherapy response and patient prognosis. Additionally, research should investigate the dynamic nature of the microbiome in CCA patients and examine longitudinal changes in the microbiome before and after immunotherapy. Moreover, it is important to explore the potential relationship between antibiotic use and immunotherapy efficacy in patients with CCA.

In conclusion, this review emphasizes the factors that contribute to the inadequate immune responses in CCAs, the potential of combining immunotherapies, and the critical need for reliable biomarkers to identify patients with cold CCA phenotypes, which could guide personalized treatment strategies and optimize patient outcomes.

Publisher's Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

GuanBo Zhang and JinSong Li contributed equally to this work.

Author contributions

GuanBo Zhang contributed to Writing—original draft, Validation, Resources, Project administration, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, and Conceptualization. JinSong Li contributed to Visualization, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, and Data curation. Gang Li contributed to Visualization and Data curation. Jie Zhang contributed to Methodology, Data curation; Zhi Yang contributed to Validation and Resources; Lin Yang contributed to Investigation and Formal analysis; ShiJie Jiang contributed to Methodology, Conceptualization; JiaXing Wang contributed to Writing—review & editing, Visualization, Supervision, Funding acquisition, and Conceptualization.

Funding

This research was supported by The Medical Key Discipline Program of Chengdu Health Commission (2021422).

Conflict of interest

The authors declare no competing interests.

Ethics approval and consent to participate

Not applicable.

Consent for publication

Not applicable.
