---
pmid: '39149915'
doi: 10.1002/smll.202404580
pmcid: ''
title: A Bimetallic Nanomodulator to Reverse Immunosuppression via Sonodynamic-Ferroptosis
  and Lactate Metabolism Modulation.
authors:
- Deng Xi
- Zhu Yutong
- Dai Zideng
- Liu Qing
- Song Ze
- Liu Tianzhi
- Huang Yuefeng
- Chen Hangrong
journal: Small (Weinheim an der Bergstrasse, Germany)
year: 2024
month: 11
volume: '20'
issue: '47'
pages: e2404580
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 13
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Ferroptosis
- Animals
- Lactic Acid
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Tumor Microenvironment
- Cobalt
- Reactive Oxygen Species
- Immunosuppression Therapy
- Mice
- Triple Negative Breast Neoplasms
- Immunotherapy
- Female
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- sonodynamic
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: preclinical-invitro
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 10
icite_rcr: 1.5372339479553407
icite_percentile: 65.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# A Bimetallic Nanomodulator to Reverse Immunosuppression via Sonodynamic-Ferroptosis and Lactate Metabolism Modulation.

## Abstract

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) responds poorly to immunotherapy due to insufficient immunogenicity and highly immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment (TME). Herein, an intelligent calcium/cobalt-based nanomodulator (Ca,Co)CO3-LND-TCPP@F127-TA (abbreviated as CCLT@FT) is developed to act as a sonodynamic-ferroptosis inducer and metabolic immunoadjuvant to enhance anti-tumor immunotherapy. More details, simultaneous reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and glutathione (GSH) depletion can be achieved due to the existence of Co2+/Co3+ redox couple in CCLT@FT. Meanwhile, mitochondrial Ca2+ overload and tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl) porphyrin (TCPP)-mediated sonodynamic therapy (SDT) further amplify the oxidative stress and promote ferroptosis in tumor cells. More impressively, CCLT@FT can modulate lactate metabolism by doping with cobalt and loading with lonidamine (LND, an inhibitor of MCT4), thereby reversing the high-lactate immunosuppressive TME. Furthermore, the combination with immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) therapy is found to achieve superior anti-tumor immunity, which in turn promotes ferroptosis of tumor cells by downregulating SLC7A11 protein, ultimately creating a "cycle" therapy. Overall, this work demonstrates a novel strategy for enhancing anti-tumor immunotherapy based on a closed-loop enhancement therapeutic route between CCLT@FT inducing ferroptosis/lactate metabolism modulation and ICB therapy, providing an alternative and important reference for effective immunotherapy of TNBC.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
