---
pmid: '39212926'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-61238-1_14
pmcid: ''
title: Immunotherapy in Gastrointestinal Cancers.
authors:
- Lote Hazel
- Chau Ian
journal: Cancer treatment and research
year: 2024
month: null
volume: '192'
issue: ''
pages: 277-303
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 6
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Gastrointestinal Neoplasms
- Immunotherapy
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- car-t
- immunotherapy
cancer_types:
- colorectal
- liver
- pancreatic
evidence_level: phase3-clinical
genes:
- PD-L1
- programmed-death-ligand-1
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer Immunotherapy and Biomarkers
diseases_annotated:
- Gastrointestinal Cancers
- MMRd
- MSI
- biliary cancer
- cancer
- colorectal cancer
- gastrointestinal cancers
- gastrointestinal malignancies
- hepatocellular carcinoma
- microsatellite instability
- mismatch-repair deficiency
- oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma
- oesophago-gastric adenocarcinoma
- pancreatic cancer
- squamous cell cancer of the anus
- toxicities
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 6
icite_rcr: 0.8484350670572143
icite_percentile: 44.2
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Immunotherapy in Gastrointestinal Cancers.

## Abstract

Immunotherapy has revolutionised cancer treatment over the past decade. Long-term durable responses can be achieved in some cancer patient populations that were previously facing terminal disease. In this chapter, we summarise current phase 3 clinical trial evidence for the use of immunotherapy in gastrointestinal cancers (oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma, oesophago-gastric adenocarcinoma, pancreatic cancer, biliary cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma, colorectal cancer, and squamous cell cancer of the anus). We discuss meaningful biomarkers used in clinical trials to select patients most likely to benefit from immunotherapy, such as mismatch-repair deficiency (MMRd)/microsatellite instability (MSI) and programmed-death-ligand-1 (PD-L1) immunohistochemistry (IHC) expression. Clinical questions are arising regarding the role of immunotherapy in the adjuvant/perioperative setting, optimal timing of surgery in patients who respond to immunotherapy, and toxicities specific to patients with gastrointestinal malignancies. We outline the current landscape and future horizon of immunotherapy in gastrointestinal cancers, such as strategies to increase effectiveness of checkpoint blockade through combinations with other checkpoint inhibitors, cytotoxic chemotherapy, targeted agents, radiotherapy, CAR-T therapy, and cancer vaccines.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
