---
pmid: '39333571'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-72629-z
pmcid: PMC11436989
title: Machine learning- a new paradigm in nanoparticle-mediated drug delivery to
  cancerous tissues through the human cardiovascular system enhanced by magnetic field.
authors:
- Akhtar Yasmeen
- Ahmad Shabbir
- Khalid Fareeha
- Junjua Moin-Ud-Din
- Aryanfar Yashar
- Hendy Ahmed S
- Tlija Mehdi
- Soliman Ahmed T
journal: Scientific reports
year: 2024
month: 9
volume: '14'
issue: '1'
pages: '22048'
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-72629-z
cited_by_count: 20
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Machine Learning
- Neoplasms
- Magnetic Fields
- Nanoparticles
- Drug Delivery Systems
- Cardiovascular System
- Nanoparticle Drug Delivery System
- Hydrogen Peroxide
- Antineoplastic Agents
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- hydrogen peroxide
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanofluid Flow and Heat Transfer
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- cancerous
- infection
- inflammation
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 6
icite_rcr: 1.2763925529920537
icite_percentile: 59.3
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
biology_processes: []
resistant_states: []
pathway_targets: []
tissue_categories: []
---

# Machine learning- a new paradigm in nanoparticle-mediated drug delivery to cancerous tissues through the human cardiovascular system enhanced by magnetic field.

## Abstract

Nanoparticle-mediated drug delivery offers a promising approach to targeted cancer therapy, leveraging the ability of nanoparticles to deliver therapeutic agents directly to cancerous tissues with minimal impact on surrounding healthy cells. The presence of these nanoparticles is governed by a concentration equation, which accounts for the diffusion, convection, and reaction of the nanoparticles with the blood components. It is well-known that whenever a disease or infection occurs in a human, in 80% of cases a rise in the concentration of hydrogen peroxide in the blood occurs. This is the reason why blood is assumed to contain hydrogen peroxide (in the present study), which is a biomarker of oxidative stress and inflammation. This study explores the integration of machine learning (ML) techniques into the optimization of drug delivery processes within the human cardiovascular system, focusing on the enhancement of these processes through the application of magnetic fields. By employing ML algorithms, we analyze and predict the behavior of nanoparticles as they navigate the complex fluid dynamics of the cardiovascular system, particularly under the influence of an external magnetic field. The predictive power of ML models enables the precise control of nanoparticle trajectories, optimizing their accumulation in cancerous tissues and improving the efficacy of the drug delivery system. The findings of this study demonstrate that ML-enhanced magnetic targeting can significantly enhance the precision and effectiveness of nanoparticle-mediated drug delivery, offering a new paradigm in cancer treatment strategies. This approach has the potential to revolutionize the field by providing personalized and highly efficient therapeutic solutions for cancer patients.

## Full Text

Machine learning- a new paradigm in nanoparticle-mediated drug delivery to cancerous tissues through the human cardiovascular system enhanced by magnetic field

Nanoparticle-mediated drug delivery offers a promising approach to targeted cancer therapy, leveraging the ability of nanoparticles to deliver therapeutic agents directly to cancerous tissues with minimal impact on surrounding healthy cells. The presence of these nanoparticles is governed by a concentration equation, which accounts for the diffusion, convection, and reaction of the nanoparticles with the blood components. It is well-known that whenever a disease or infection occurs in a human, in 80% of cases a rise in the concentration of hydrogen peroxide in the blood occurs. This is the reason why blood is assumed to contain hydrogen peroxide (in the present study), which is a biomarker of oxidative stress and inflammation. This study explores the integration of machine learning (ML) techniques into the optimization of drug delivery processes within the human cardiovascular system, focusing on the enhancement of these processes through the application of magnetic fields. By employing ML algorithms, we analyze and predict the behavior of nanoparticles as they navigate the complex fluid dynamics of the cardiovascular system, particularly under the influence of an external magnetic field. The predictive power of ML models enables the precise control of nanoparticle trajectories, optimizing their accumulation in cancerous tissues and improving the efficacy of the drug delivery system. The findings of this study demonstrate that ML-enhanced magnetic targeting can significantly enhance the precision and effectiveness of nanoparticle-mediated drug delivery, offering a new paradigm in cancer treatment strategies. This approach has the potential to revolutionize the field by providing personalized and highly efficient therapeutic solutions for cancer patients.

Introduction

Drug delivery is a critical aspect of modern medical treatment, particularly in oncology, where the precise targeting of therapeutic agents to malignant tissues is essential for effective outcomes. The complication of carrying drugs to precise spots within the body is prejudiced by many factors, together with the chemical, and physical properties of the drug, the biological atmosphere, and the dynamics of the cardiovascular system. Developments in drug delivery systems, such as nanoparticle carriers, convection-enhanced delivery, and liposome encapsulation, have revealed promise in overwhelming traditional blockades, such as the heterogeneous tumor, and blood-brain barrier environments. These technologies are considered to advance the biodistribution, and pharmacokinetics of drugs, confirming that therapeutic agents grasp the intended spot of action in adequate concentrations while minimalizing systemic toxicity. Drug delivery is a foundation of pharmaceutical sciences, mainly in the progress of targeted therapies that minimalize systemic side effects whereas maximizing therapeutic value. The accomplishment of drug delivery hinges on understanding both the biological environment in which they function, and the pharmaceutical attributes of the therapeutic agents. The pharmaceutical viewpoint emphases on the optimization, and design of drug formulations, together with the growth of novel carriers such as nanoparticles that increase the stability, and controlled release of drugs. These transporters are caused to overcome the limits of traditional drug delivery, such as rapid degradation, and poor bioavailability confirming that the therapeutic agents reach their proposed target sites in effective concentrations. Computational modeling has become vital in the arena of drug delivery, providing perceptions into the intricate interactions between biological tissues, drugs, and the cardiovascular system. These models allow researchers to simulate diverse delivery situations, heighten drug formulations, and forecast the actions of drugs inside the body. Moreover, machine learning and other innovative analytical methods are gradually being integrated into drug delivery investigation, presenting the potential to identify critical factors that affect the efficiency of treatment and to personalize therapies based on patient-specific data. As research stays to grow, the incorporation of experimental data, computational models, and emerging technologies holds excessive promise for progressing the arena of drug delivery. The eventual goal is to develop further efficient, and effective delivery systems that can overcome the inherent encounters of targeting specific tissues, particularly in the context of intricate diseases like cancer. Through these advancements, the effectiveness, and precision of therapeutic interventions are anticipated to progress significantly, leading to healthier patient outcomes and reduced side effects. Prior studies have discovered several approaches to augment drug delivery. For instance, the delivery of liposome-encapsulated temozolomide to brain tumors has been investigated to comprehend drug transport mechanisms for optimization. Additionally, the blend of convection-enhanced delivery approach with liposomal cytotoxic, and antiangiogenic drugs has been studied to advance treatment efficiency in heterogeneous brain tumors. These tactics highlight the need for a profounder understanding of drug transport and uptake in complicated tumor environments, which has directed to the growth of computational models aimed at enhancing drug delivery systems. Computational modeling acting a central role in this field, as it permits for the analysis, and simulation of drug interactions within the biological system. Research has shown that understanding the relationship between biological, and chemotherapeutics environment is vibrant for evolving optimized delivery systems. Mathematical modeling of drug carriage and uptake in realistic models of solid tumors has more enhanced our thoughts of these procedures. The subsequent references cover relevant literature on drug delivery.

The Levenberg Marquardt neural network (LM-NN) indicates a neural approach renowned for its effectiveness in tackling complicated and nonlinear problems. Joining the Levenberg-Marquardt process with neural-networks, the LM-NN approach stands out for its ability in exercising neural-networks to precisely model intricate relations within datasets. This system iteratively regulates the weights of the neural-networks, improving its predictive abilities. Adeloye et al. established the efficiency of LM-NN in conducting complex interplay between storage, and trustworthiness parameters in global storage–yield reliability models allied with the Levenberg–Marquardt process. Bilski et al. studied the connection between the Feedforward Neural Network, and local LM-NN making definite modifications to augment the training process and report convergence issues. Kermani et al. discovered the presentation of the LM-NN scheme in electronic applications, concentrating on enhancing the effectiveness of the training method. Moreover, Beyond thermal transport prediction, LM-NN finds applications in miscellaneous fields such as fiscal time succession estimate, singular functional schemes in quantum calculus, peristaltic transportation model in biomedical engineering, numerical acumen paradigms for fluid-dynamics. In these applications, LM-NN aids in conducting physical assumptions, translating systems of partial differential equations (PDEs) into ordinary differential equations (ODEs) by means of similarity transformation, and forecasting solutions proficiently. Many researchers have utilized nanostructures in blood on pulsatile flow in many situations, including cardiovascular systems, implanted devices, and oral drug delivery. Using titanium-alloy-gold mixture nanoparticles, Reddy et al. inspected blood in a spinning tube with viscous dissipation, Lorentz force, and heat radiation. The Response Surface Methodology (RSM) is used in the investigation, which deals with intricate partial differential equations, to scrutinize the vulnerability of flow factors to heat transport. Reddy et al. analyzed the pulsatile magnetohydrodynamic flow of a third-grade hybrid nanofluid flow in a porous channel, incorporating thermal radiation, viscous dissipation, and Ohmic heating. The base fluid is blood, with alumina, and gold nanoparticles. The study fills a literature gap by investigating the pulsatile flow of a 3rd-grade hybrid nanofluid, addressing applications in cancer therapeutics, biomedical engineering, food processing, and nano-drug suspensions. Habibi et al. investigated how the concentration and mass of magnetic nanoparticles affect their distribution and interaction with blood flow under the effect of an external magnetic field. They used a numerical method to deal with the intricate equations that relate the nanoparticles, magnetic field, and fluid. They exhibited a case where the tiny particles deliver drugs in the blood, which has a variable viscosity that trails a power-law model. Zaman et al. took into account the dynamic of the blood flow sutured with copper nanoparticles in an artery. The model worked with realistic boundary conditions and addressed energy partial differential equations (PDEs) and momentum. In the existence of mild stenotic conditions, non-linear coupled equations endure simplification, and mathematical solutions are attained using a finite difference method. In an innovative study, Ali et al. predicted the thermophysical attributes of a copper-SWCNT-based nanofluid. The research emphasizes modeling two-dimensional pulsatile Casson fluid flow subjected to the consequence of magnetic field, and thermal radiation. The study directed an exhaustive examination of mass and heat transfer, exploring the dynamics of porous pulsating Casson hybrid nanofluid. For tackling time-dependent governing mathematical equations, the study deployed the vorticity stream function formulation, and finite-difference flows solver acting as an illustration for blood flow in stenosed arteries. Shahzadi et al. considered the transmission of heat in pulsatile motion via a restricted channel with thermal rays and a magnetic field. The investigation looked at wall shear stress, momentum, and temperature profiles in composed of hybrid nanofluid containing copper-SWCNT, and water copper nanotechnology. The time-varying equations regarding incompressible fluid flow are converted and solved using the finite difference technique via the vorticity-stream function formulation. Relevant literature can be found in the following sources.

Novelty

In this research, we have revolutionized the field by developing an inclusive mathematical model based on pulsatile flow, uniquely considering the impact of heat absorption and generation on pulsatile flow composed of nanoparticles and undergoing chemical reactions. This comprehensive analysis, enhanced by machine learning techniques, addresses a significant research gap, as such an in-depth examination of these combined factors has not been previously undertaken. Despite numerous studies on drug delivery and fluid dynamics, there has been a lack of integrated models that simultaneously consider the effects of heat transfer, nanoparticle dynamics, and chemical reactions within pulsatile flow. Additionally, we have employed a more realistic model for fluid rheology, enhancing the precision of our estimates. To authenticate our approach, we have compared our outcomes with current studies in the literature, further establishing the significance and credibility of our findings. Our work can also provide valuable insights into transport phenomena and heat transfer in biological systems, such as blood flow in the arteries and the delivery of nanoparticles for drugs. We hope that our work can inspire further research on the pulsatile flow of non-Newtonian fluids in porous media and contribute to the advancement of science and engineering.

Problem formulation

We examine from Fig. 1 the behavior of a nanofluid in a parallel plate channel with wall transpiration, situated in a porous medium, and subjected to a transverse magnetic field. The flow is two-dimensional, laminar, and incompressible, with electrical conductivity. Pulsatile flow is driven by a pressure gradient having both steady and oscillating components. Wall transpiration is simulated by injecting at the lower plate and suction at the upper plate. The Cartesian coordinate system is chosen based on the geometry, where the channel plates are positioned at y = ± c. The momentum equation incorporates the Forchheimer law, and Navier-Stokes equation with the last two terms accounting for this law. Additionally, we consider the mass transport of a chemically reactive species through the channel. Assuming blood contains chemically reactive species forming a homogeneous mixture, C represents the concentration of this species in mol/m3. A first-order homogeneous and irreversible reaction is assumed, with a constant concentration of C0 at the bottom and top channel walls, respectively. Due to different temperatures at the two walls, diffusion is considered. To begin with, no wall transpiration effects are anticipated, leading to a linear temperature variation across the channel. Subsequently, the introduction of suction/injection induces changes in the temperature profile. The fundamental steady-state equations for the conservation of mass, momentum, thermal energy, and nanoparticle concentration in nanofluids can be expressed in Cartesian coordinates x and y, as detailed by Khan and Pop.

The governing equations are written in this dimensional form [40]:

Continuity equation:

Momentum equation:

Energy equation:

Equation for the nanoparticle concentration:

Concentration equation for the chemically reactive species (H2O2):

We designate the thermal diffusivity as “” and the temperature of the biofluid as “T”. In Eq. (2), the first and second derivative terms signify thermal convection and diffusion, respectively. We assign symbols to various parameters in our study: “” represents dimensional time, “u” denotes horizontal velocity, “” stands for wall transpiration velocity, “” represents density, “p” stands for pressure, “” signifies kinematic viscosity, “” denotes electrical conductivity, “” represents magnetic field strength, “” represents porous medium permeability, and “” denote inertial drag coefficients. Notably, the rheological parameter. In the above system, “C” represents the concentration of the species that are involved in the reaction, “” is the mass diffusivity that measures how fast the species can diffuse through the fluid, and “k” is the reaction rate constant that depends on the temperature and pressure of the system, that indicates how quickly the reaction consumes the species. The negative sign in front of this term means that the species is being depleted by the reaction. The equation also includes two reference concentrations: “” is the characteristic concentration that defines the scale of the problem that is used to normalize the equation. “” is thermophoresis diffusion coefficient, “” is chemical reaction rate. The boundary conditions for this problem (for t> 0) are given by:

To simplify the problem and reduce the number of variables, we introduce the following dimensionless quantities:

Using these dimensionless quantities, we can transform the governing equations into a simpler form:

where.

 Reynolds number

 Forchheimer quadratic drag parameter

 Schmidt number

 Prandtl number

 Darcy parameter

 magnetic parameter

 chemical reaction parameter

 Slip parameter

At the outset, we presume the fluid to be at rest, and the temperature and concentration distributions are also constant throughout the domain. This assumption leads to the following initial conditions:

Here, “” represents the static, “” represents the oscillatory components, and “"denotes the frequency of the pressure gradient. The boundary conditions ultimately take the following form:

The definition of the pressure gradient is expressed as:

Numerical strategy

For the numerical solution, we employ a fully-implicit approach approach to the above system as follows:

Importantly, the superscript and the subscript denote the time level and the location of the functional value on a uniformly spaced grid:

It is easy to note that, to find the solution at any time level, we will have to solve four tri-diagonal systems, each corresponding to the respective equation in the above system. Further, it is obvious from Eq. 14 that the velocity profile will be periodic in nature. However, for smaller values of the Eckert number, the rest of the profiles are not expected to be cyclic.

Numerical strategy/details

Grid structure and type

In this study, a structured Cartesian grid is utilized, characterized by cells of equal dimensions. The choice of a structured grid is driven by its ability to maintain consistent resolution and simplify the implementation of boundary conditions.

Mesh refinement near the vessel wall

Special attention is given to the grid refinement near the walls of the blood vessel to accurately capture the intricate physics of the boundary layer and the flow characteristics in close proximity to the wall. The grid is polished neighboring the vessel walls, confirming that the near-wall physics, such as shear stresses, and velocity gradients are adequately resolved. This improvement is essential to capture the impact of pulsatile flow and the collaboration of nanoparticles with the wall.

Computational tools and codes

The numerical outcomes are attained using a custom in-house code explicitly developed for this study. The code is augmented for the problem at hand, letting for effectual handling of the complex interactions involved in the flow and heat transmission procedures.

Computational time and resources

The computational time varied based on the grid resolution and the intricacy of the simulations. For the typical grid resolution used in this study, the average computational time per simulation was 87 s, utilizing an AMD Ryzen 7 4700U processor with Radeon Graphics at 2.00 GHz on a high-performance computing machine.

Mesh and boundary conditions

A detailed figure illustrating the computational mesh is provided in Fig. 2. This figure shows the grid distribution, especially the refinement near the walls, and the placement of boundary conditions such as inlet, outlet, and wall boundaries. The boundary conditions are carefully chosen to reflect the physiological conditions relevant to the study. The computational and physical domains of the problem are illustrated in Fig. 2(a) and 2(b). In Fig. 2(a), the grid points are equidistant in the ζη-plane, while in Fig. 2(b), the corresponding points in the XY-plane are stretched towards the walls of the channel.

Machine learning procedure

The Neural-Fitting app facilitates network creation, data selection, performance, and training evaluation, integrating with mean square error metrics, and regression analysis. Utilizing sigmoid-hidden-neurons in a linear output neuron, and two layers feed-forward network, it adeptly manages multi-dimensional plotting tasks, with an appropriate numeral neuron in its unseen layer. In terms of training possibilities, three methods are offered:

The Bayesian-Regularization-Algorithm, though typically time-consuming, has the potential to achieve robust generalization, especially for complex, noisy, or small, datasets. Training halts grounded on adaptive-weight minimization; a regulation technique employed to enhance model performance.

The Levenberg-Marquardt Algorithm is known for its higher memory consumption yet faster execution time. It autonomously terminates training upon detecting stagnation in generalization, signaled by a rise in the mean-square error of authentication samples.

The Scaled-Conjugate-Gradient Algorithm, characterized by its lower memory requirements, also concludes training when further improvements in generalization are no longer observed.

In neural networks, the output of a neuron is typically determined by the weighted sum of its inputs, which includes a bias term. This sum is then handled through an activation function, often nonlinear, to generate the ultimate output. The preliminary inputs, sourced from exterior data points such as papers, and images, play a vital role in producing the outputs.

Once the centers are determined, the weights can be calculated by minimalizing the output error using a linear-pseudo-inverse solution, as shown in Eq. (19).

where matrix A is defined as

During each time step, a distinct gradient-based training algorithm is utilized to fine-tune the weights. The magnitude, and direction of the weight update are determined by moving in the differing direction of the cost-gradient. The revised and updated weights are mathematically determined as depicted in Eq. (18).

The process of computing the gradient for weight updates can be outlined as follows.

Where the learning rate is represented by . The Gradient Descent optimization method can be likened to a hiker, embodying the weight factor, striving to grasp the minimum cost by descending a valley which symbolizes the cost function. Each step the hiker takes is determined by their slope steepness and learning rate.

The outcomes of training and validation are typically conveyed using metrics such as the regression R values and mean squared error (MSE).

The regression values measure the relationship between targets and outputs. An R-value of 1 indicates a strong correlation, whereas 0 proposes a random relationship.

The MSE quantifies the average squared difference between targets and outputs. Lower values signify superior performance, with zero representing no error.

The ANN controller

Lately, the Artificial Neural Network (ANN) controller has grown significant recognition for its potential in energy-management approaches. The construction of the ANN is composed of three dissimilar layers: the input layer, hidden layers, and the output layer. Each of these layers comprises neurons, also recognized as nodes, which are interconnected to form a multi-layered network. The neurons inside the input layer take and process info from the outward environment, which is then transmitted to the hidden layers, where intricate computations and learning processes happen. Lastly, the processed information is transported to the output layer, which generates the wanted response or prediction. The functionality of the ANN controller is divided into two key stages: the training stage and the operational stage. Through the training stage, the ANN learns from a set of input-output pairs by fine-tuning the weights of the connections between neurons, a procedure that aids the network to identify patterns and make exact predictions. When the training is done, the ANN changeovers to the operational stage, where it applies the learned outlines to new, unseen data, thus permitting effective real-time decision-making in energy management. The design and structure of the ANN controller model used in this investigation are demonstrated in Fig. 3, which offers a graphic illustration of the layered architecture and the flow of information between the neurons. This figure helps to elucidate the complex workings of the ANN and highlights its capability to improve energy-management strategies through unconventional computational techniques.

The ANN model is developed utilizing the MATLAB/Simulink environment. As depicted in Fig. 4 below, it showcases a feedforward NN model consisting of two neurons in the input layer, ten neurons in the hidden layer, and a single neuron in the output layer. The Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm is utilized for training a collection of duty cycle data points derived from simulation.

Benchmarking the numerical scheme

Our numerical results exhibit a remarkable agreement with those documented in the existing literature, specifically as shown in Fig. 5, where a direct comparison is made with the findings reported by Ali et al.. This close alignment with previously established results reinforces the credibility and accuracy of our numerical scheme. Ali et al. conducted an in-depth study on the flow behavior of micropolar fluids within a channel, which served as a foundational reference for our work. To ensure consistency with the conditions described in their research, we performed a comparative analysis under the Newtonian fluid framework by setting the micropolar parameters to zero, effectively simulating a non-micropolar scenario. It is worth emphasizing that the work by Ali et al. was also based on numerical simulations, further validating our approach and the robustness of our computational model.

Role of parameters in drug delivery

To discuss the role of parameters such as Darcy parameter, Reynolds number, magnetic parameter, Forchheimer quadratic drag parameter, Schmidt number, Prandtl number, chemical reaction parameter, and slip parameter in drug delivery, it’s important to ponder how each parameter effects the flow and transport phenomena appropriate to the process. Underneath is an summary of each parameter’s role in drug delivery.

Reynolds number (re)

The Reynolds number characterizes the flow regime inside a channel or vessel, distinctive between turbulent, and laminar flows. In drug delivery, a higher Reynolds number basically designates a more turbulent flow, which can improve the mixing and dispersal of nanoparticles or drugs. On the other hand, a lower Reynolds number suggests laminar flow, which is more probable and might be beneficial for controlled drug release in marked areas.

Darcy parameter (λ)

The Darcy parameter defines the permeability of the porous medium through which the drug is distributed. A higher Darcy parameter shows higher permeability, enabling easier fluid flow and possibly more effective drug transportation through tissues or porous drug carriers.

Forchheimer quadratic drag parameter (nf)

The Forchheimer parameter responsible for inertial effects in porous media, mainly at higher flow velocities. It familiarizes a nonlinear resistance to flow, which can affect the rate at which drugs are transported through permeable structures. Higher values of Nf upsurge resistance, reducing the drug delivery procedure.

Magnetic parameter (ha)

The magnetic parameter govern the effect of an outward magnetic field on the flow of a magnetic nanofluid. In drug delivery, particularly using magnetic nanoparticles, the magnetic parameter can be adjusted to control the motion and confinement of the drug in the body, present a method for targeted delivery.

Schmidt number (sc)

The Schmidt number is the ratio of momentum diffusivity (viscosity) to mass diffusivity, leading the relative thickness of the velocity boundary layer to the concentration boundary layer. In drug delivery, a high Schmidt number suggests sluggish diffusion of drug molecules compared to momentum, affecting how swiftly the drug spreads from the delivery position.

Chemical reaction parameter (kc)

The chemical reaction parameter characterizes the rate of reaction between the drug and neighboring tissues or fluid. A higher Kc shows quicker reaction rates, which can augment drug activation or degradation at the delivery site. This parameter is vital for drugs that necessitate in-situ activation or controlled release through chemical reactions.

Prandtl number (pr)

The Prandtl number denotes the ratio of momentum diffusivity to thermal diffusivity. In drug delivery systems concerning thermal effects (e.g., hyperthermia treatments), the Prandtl number can effect the temperature distribution and therefore the usefulness of thermally-activated drug release mechanisms.

Slip parameter (γ)

The slip parameter measures the degree to which the fluid velocity varies from zero at the boundary (no-slip condition). In drug delivery, especially in microfluidic systems, a nonzero slip can effect the distribution and swiftness of drug transportation, potentially enhancing delivery to definite areas while avoiding stagnation nearby the walls.

Applications

In drug delivery, parameters like the Darcy parameter, Reynolds number, and Forchheimer quadratic drag parameter aid improve fluid dynamics and drug circulation within biological systems. The magnetic parameter is decisive for magnetically targeted therapies, supervising nanoparticles to precise sites. The Schmidt and Prandtl numbers aid in understanding mass and heat transfer, vital for controlled drug release and thermoresponsive systems. The chemical reaction parameter controls drug degradation and release timing, while the slip parameter influences how drugs navigate surfaces, enhancing delivery efficiency. Together, these parameters ensure precise and effective therapeutic outcomes.

Results and discussion

This section explores how the momentum, thermal, and concentration profiles of blood-based nanofluid flow are affected by various parameters. The flow is driven by a periodic force in a horizontal channel, as shown in Fig. 1. The nanofluid consists of two kinds of nanoparticles. The values of the governing parameters used in this study are as follows:,and  unless otherwise mentioned. To demonstrate the robustness of our numerical approach, we observe variations in numerical outcomes (specifically for temperature, velocity, and concentration) across diverse spatial step-sizes at a specific time-level. We calculate the disparities in numerical results between two consecutive grids, where the step size on a grid is half that of the preceding one. Notably, we observe a consistent reduction in these differences, indicating a converging trend as the step size approaches zero. This convergence serves as a validation of the stability of our computational methodology, and detailed results are available in Table 1 for reference.

The portrayal of how the velocity profile changes across the channel with time is outlined in Fig. 6(a-b). Examining this, we observe repetitive cycles in the flow regime, guided by the parameter ω dictating the frequency of the cycle. Significantly, the initial cycle exhibits a relatively lower maximum flow velocity compared to subsequent cycles. This discrepancy arises from the initial stagnation of the fluid, making the applied force from the pressure gradient less efficient than when the flow gains momentum over time. Consequently, the initial cycle lacks symmetry compared to the later ones. Initially, stagnant fluid exists between the two channel walls, leading to a linear temperature variation due to the fixed wall temperatures. However, as the driving force becomes active, a flattening effect on thermal distribution becomes apparent in a significant portion of the channel. This indicates that maximum fluid aligns with the temperature of the bottom channel wall (refer to Fig. 6(c-d)). Consequently, an enhanced thermal gradient emerges neighboring the channel‘s top wall, as depicted in Fig. 4b. Analyzing Fig. 6(e-h) reveals a noteworthy resemblance between the nanoparticle concentration surface and the concentration of the impurity. However, there’s a notable distinction in the gradient near the upper channel wall, which lacks dominance. Our findings not only corroborate existing studies but also provide novel insights into the dynamics of pulsatile flows, thermal distribution, and nanoparticle transport in channels. This study advances the understanding of these phenomena by highlighting the transient effects, asymmetry in thermal gradients, and unique nanoparticle behavior, which have not been thoroughly explored in previous works.

Before we discuss profiles, we note that Fig. 4, shows that the velocity and temperature profile vary significantly with time. This is due to the presence of the term  in the equation for the flow velocity. The temperature field on the other hand varies with time due to the presence of the term  in the heat equation (this term accounts for heat generation). A simple profile for each of , and  shows that the two quantities tend to approach a steady-state solution, for the present problem, no matter what are the values of the governing parameters. Now in the discussion to follow, we have considered the velocity and the temperature profile at the time level (t = 10) whereas the , and  will denote the steady-state solution.

Figure 7 (a-d) shows that the magnetic field is very influential for the flow velocity, compared to temperature variation. The reason for this weaker dependence of the temperature profile on the magnetic field intensity, is the term  in the heat equation, as the Eckert number is very small for the present problem. Moreover, we notice a very sharp decrease in a velocity profile, for just a reasonable rise in the Hartman number. This observation suggests that the magnetic field may be used as an effective tool to control the blood flow, in the desired part of the human artery. To examine the influence of the Reynolds number (Re) on the flow regime within the physical domain, we turn our attention to Fig. 7e. This enhancement in velocity is particularly notable as the velocity profiles begin to exhibit a distinct tilt towards the upper wall of the channel. This tilt can be accredited to the fact that, as the Reynolds number grows, there is an associated increase in suction velocity, under the assumption that fluid properties such as viscosity and density remain constant. The increased suction velocity acts to skew the velocity profile towards the upper wall, reflecting the dynamic changes in the flow field induced by higher Reynolds numbers. Further analysis of Fig. 7f reveals additional complexities in the thermal distribution within the channel. Upon the initiation of flow, a localized region near the upper wall experiences a significant intensification in the temperature gradient. This phenomenon is crucial as it effectively disrupts and eliminates the initial linear thermal distribution that was present across the channel before the flow commenced. The steepening of the temperature gradient near the upper wall indicates a shift in the heat transfer dynamics, likely due to the increased convective effects associated with higher flow velocities. Turning now to the influence of the Darcy parameter λ, as illustrated in Fig. 7(i-l), it is evident that λ plays a crucial role in enhancing the velocity of the flow. This enhancement is rooted in the diminishing influence of the Darcian force, which acts as a frictional and resistive force within the flow. As the parameter λ increases within the mathematical framework, the resistive effects of the Darcian force are weakened, leading to a more pronounced effect of the pressure gradient driving the flow. The presence of the Forchheimer term in the governing equations is a direct consequence of applying Forchheimer’s law to model flow through porous media. This term becomes increasingly significant as λ increases, representing the reduced opposition to the flow within the channel. This acceleration is clearly depicted in Fig. 7(i), where the velocity profiles show a marked increase with growing λ. The reduction in resistive forces as λ increases allows for more efficient fluid transport through the porous medium, effectively enhancing the overall flow rate. This insight underscores the importance of considering the Darcy parameter when modeling fluid flow in porous media, as it significantly influences both the velocity and distribution of the flow within such systems.

Turning consideration to Fig. 8(a-d), it manifests that the Darcy Forchmeir parameter Nf plays a key role in promoting flow velocity. This spectacle is grounded in the fading effect of the Darcian force, operating as a resistive, or frictional force, with a growing λ. This, in turn, results in a heightened effect of the pressure gradient. The introduction of the term into the governing equations is a consequence of applying the Forchheimer law to model porous media within the existing geometry. An augmented role for this term translates to heightened flow resistance, ultimately contributing to the deceleration of the flow across the channel. Figure 8(e-h) shows that, in the absence of any chemical reaction (Kl), there is no rise in  or  profiles. The temperature profile is actually coincident with the line . This is the reason why; we do observe only three (instead of four) profiles. We notice a lowering in nanoparticle concentration as  the profile is raised due to the rising values of . Thus, we conclude that the intensification of the chemical reaction results in the rise in the  profiles, while lowering the nanoparticle. Further Fig. 8(i-l), revealing a significant reduction in concentration profiles influenced by both Reynolds number (Re) and Schmidt number (Sc).

Figure 9(a-h) shows that Nt and Nb have exactly opposite impacts (quantitatively) on the , , and  profiles. This phenomenon is due to the term  in the mathematical model problem. The factor increases with  and decreases with . This (respective increase and decrease of the factor explains the quantitatively opposite impact of the parameters , and . Of particular significance is the recognition that the pressure gradient, serving as the exclusive driving force in the current scenario, encompasses both oscillatory and steady components, distinguished by respective symbols. Finally, from Fig. 9(i-l), it is easy to note that  (the ratio of the diffusivity of nanoparticles and chemically reactive species) lowers the measurable concentration of the species. The finding may have applications in many ailments such as Alzheimer’s disease, cardiovascular diseases, asthma, atherosclerosis, cancer, sepsis rheumatoid arthritis, thyroiditis, type 1 diabetes, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease, ischemia-reperfusion injury, and cystic fibrosis. Elevated levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) may arise from various sources, including heightened mitochondrial dysfunction, metabolic activity, peroxisome activity, intensified oncogene activation, cellular receptor signaling, increased oxidase, cyclooxygenase, thymidine phosphorylase, and lipoxygenase activity, or via interactions with sensitive immune cells.

The steady component Ps plays a pivotal role in contributing to flow velocity (Fig. 10(a-d)). In contrast, the impact of the oscillatory component Po depends on the characteristics of the term cos(ωt). For negative terms, it acts to diminish the exterior force exerted on the system, resulting in a deceleration of the flow. Conversely, in the alternate case, it serves to accelerate the flow. Omitting a specific figure for this purpose is intentional, as the comprehension of this phenomenon is deemed achievable through an understanding of the inherent physics governing the problem. (see Fig. 10(e-h)). the steady component Ps consistently contributes to maintaining flow velocity, while the oscillatory component Po modulates this flow depending on the phase of the oscillation. The understanding of these interactions is essential for comprehending the overall behavior of the fluid system under study, as the combined effects of Ps and Po govern the temporal and spatial variations in flow velocity.

Magnetic field intensity, for the present problem, is characterized by the perimeter Ha. An inspection of the governing equations makes it evident that the parameter will mainly affect the shared stress and heat transfer rate as it explicitly appears in the momentum and energy equations. We noted that the parameter tends to lower the shear stress at the walls which may have potential applications in scenarios where artery walls need to be relaxed by dropping the pressure entered by blood in the artery (see Table 2).

The impact of the Reynolds numbers Re on physical quantities of our interest may be seen in Table 3. We noticed that at the upper wall of the channel velocity gradient is the quantity which is affected the most. We also note a reasonable decrease in the heat transfer rate along with non-significant changes in  and . A similar quantitative trend may also be observed at the lower channel wall. However, it would not be wrong to declare that the Reynolds number is not mainly Influential for the physical quantities at the lower wall of the channel.

Table 4 is devoted to understanding the nature of the influence the parameter  has on the physical quantities. We note a rise in the velocity gradient (which is proportional to the respective shear stress). However. The quantitative increase shows a decreasing trend as “” increases. For example, as  varies from 1 to 2, we know a change  in the first decimal place. However, as  is changed from 4 to 5, we notice a change in the 3rd decimal place, for the same rate. The trend is due to the factor  in the governing equation. The rest of the data is almost invariant with respect to any change in .

Now, Table 5 obviously presents the numerical data showing the influence of the parameter (Nf) on physical the quantities of our interest. We keep in mind that both Nf and  physically represent the same phenomena (that is, the quantification of  drag force on the flow due to the assumption of the presence of the porous medium). Therefore, it is expected that the two parameters will impact the flow in a similar manner (at least quantitatively), and this expectation is confirmed by Table 5.

From Table 6, it is clear that Kl (the chemical reaction parameter) affects the , and  profiles due to the nature of the government equation. However, from the table, we notice a minute change in the heat transfer rate due to a weaker coupling of the energy equation with the equation governing the nanoparticle concentration. We further note that this parameter is very influential for the concentration of the nanoparticle. A rapid rise in the concentration profile has been observed with an appropriate rise in the parameter Kl.

Now, Table 7 shows that the Schmidt number (Sc) causes a remarkable increase (in magnitude) in the two quantities (i.e.,  and ) whereas the  remains constant due to the obvious reason that Sc. does not appear in the momentum equation. It is, however, the heat transfer rate at the upper wall which shows a remarkable decrease with the parameter. Again, observation of the data also revealed that the heat transfer rate at the lower channel wall is almost zero which predicts the flat nature of the thermal profile in the region.

Now, we discuss the role of the parameters Nt and Nb, for a present problem, as given in Tables 8 and 9. Since, neither Nt nor Nb appears in the momentum equation, the shear stress at either wall remains constant. We don’t notice any reasonable change in the physical quantities except in the heat transfer rate at the upper wall which is a notable decreasing trend. with Nb.

From Tables 10 and 11, it is absolutely right to state that the components of the pressure gradient Ps and Po (which respectively denote the static and oscillatory pressure gradient) are the most significant parameters, in terms of their influence on tabular data. The reason is obvious; both Ps and Po give the magnitude of the drag force which is applied to the fluid. This force will determine the velocity of the flow and therefore will influence everything from the shear stress to the concentration of the nanomaterial in the fluid.

Finally, the role of the parameter  for the present problem, maybe understood from Table 12. As  appears in the governing equation from , we notice no change in the shear stress due to the decoupled governing equations. Further, there is a quantity  and  the ones which are influence the most.

In our exploration of drug delivery via pulsatile flow saturated with nanostructures and undergoing chemical reactions, we have embraced advanced methodologies, including machine learning techniques. The adoption of the Neural Fitting application has been instrumental in refining our analytical approach, facilitating custom neural networks, and data selection creation through comprehensive training. The efficacy of our skilled network was rigorously assessed by means of reputable metrics such as regression analysis, and mean square error (refer to Fig. 11a-c), underscoring the value of this innovative approach in precision, and enhancing the depth of our research outcomes.

Recognizing the pivotal role of data quality and quantity in machine learning models, we acknowledge the significance of a diverse and representative training dataset. Variations in solar energy exposure, including seasonal fluctuations, weather patterns, and solar radiation levels, can significantly impact the model’s performance. Furthermore, the inherent complexity of real-world systems may necessitate the use of assumptions or simplifications in machine learning models, which may not always accurately reflect the intricacies of the phenomenon under investigation. It is imperative to remain vigilant in addressing these challenges to ensure the reliability and applicability of our findings in the context of drug delivery dynamics.

Limitations and potential applications

Limits of the model

While the model offers valued insights into the dynamics of drug delivery, it is important to acknowledge certain boundaries that may influence its accuracy, and applicability:

Assumptions and Simplifications: The model depend on some assumptions, such as homogeneous fluid properties, Newtonian fluid behavior, and simplified connections between biological tissues, and drug carriers. These assumptions, while compulsory for numerical viability, may not fully apprehension the complications of real-world biotic environments. For example, the non-Newtonian nature of blood, categorized by variable viscosity under unlike shear rates, is not responsible for this model.

Grid Configuration: The usage of a Cartesian grid with even cell dimensions, while computationally effective, limits the model’s capability to precisely capture thorough variations in drug delivery, particularly neighboring vessel walls or within intricate anatomical structures. This restriction could results in wrongness the forecasting localized drug meditations, which are dangerous for evaluating therapeutic efficacy.

Navier-Stokes Equation Constraints: The model’s dependance on the Navier-Stokes equations, which are conventionally used for Newtonian fluids, postures limitations in correctly representing microscale flow effects, non-Newtonian biological fluids, and porous media dynamics. As a consequence, the model might simplify circumstances where these factors show a noteworthy role in drug delivery.

Computational Constraints: Due to constraints related to computational time, and resources, the quality of the simulations and the range of parameters explored were limited. Developed resolution simulations, though extra demanding, could offer a more detailed thoughtful drug distribution, particularly in anatomically multifaceted sections.

Potential applications for forthcoming studies

Despite these limitations, the model grasps noteworthy potential for wider applications in future investigate:

Personalized Medicine: The model can be habitual to simulate drug delivery in custom-made medication by integrating patient-specific physiological, and anatomical data. This method could aid in augmenting drug dosage and delivery procedures tailored to discrete patients, thereby refining therapeutic consequences.

Development of Targeted Therapies: The extension of the model to comprise more thorough tissue interactions and non-Newtonian fluid dynamics, it could be utilized to design and heighten targeted drug delivery systems, such as nanostructure or liposomes, for countless diseases, together with cardiovascular disorders, and cancer.

Investigation of Alternate Drug Delivery Routes: The model can be altered to examine drug delivery through alternative routes, such as transdermal or inhalation systems. This could lead to the growth of more effective delivery mechanisms for drugs that are presently directed through less operative or more invasive methods.

Drug Delivery in Intricate Anatomical Sections: Forthcoming studies could apply the model to simulate drug delivery in multifaceted anatomical sections, such as the liver, or brain, where drug distribution is extremely affected by the microarchitecture of the tissue. Adaptive meshing techniques, and improved grid configurations could be laboring to progress the precision of these simulations.

Incorporation with Multiscale Models: The model can be cohesive with multiscale models that linkage molecular-level communications with macroscopic drug circulation. This tactic would deliver a more inclusive understanding of the drug delivery procedure, from cellular uptake to systemic delivery.

By addressing the boundaries and discovering these potential applications, the model can be refined and extended, contributing to more precise predictions and innovative methods in drug delivery investigation.

Concluding remarks

This comprehensive study investigates the influence of various parameters on momentum, thermal, and concentration profiles in a horizontal channel where blood, containing nanoparticles along with impurities like H2O2, serves as the base fluid. The analysis includes a stability check for the numerical scheme and examines the impact of parameters such as magnetic field intensity, Reynolds number, Darcy parameter, Prandtl number, chemical reaction parameter, and others. The key points of the study can be summarized as follows:

The study explores the evolving temperature distribution in the channel, noting a flattening effect on thermal distribution and a higher thermal gradient near the upper channel wall.

Magnetic field intensity, represented by the parameter Ha, significantly impacts flow velocity and shear stress, suggesting potential applications in controlling blood flow in arteries.

The Reynolds number affects flow velocity, leading to a noticeable tilt in velocity profiles towards the upper wall, with increased suction velocity and intensified temperature gradients.

Darcy parameter λ and Darcy Forchmeir parameter Nf play crucial roles in flow velocity, affecting flow resistance and influencing the pressure gradient in porous media.

The chemical reaction parameter (Kl) influences concentration profiles significantly, with a rapid rise observed in concentration profiles with increasing Kl.

Schmidt number (Sc) causes a remarkable increase in concentration and velocity magnitudes, while the heat transfer rate at the upper wall decreases notably.

Components of the pressure gradient (Ps and Po) are identified as the most significant parameters, determining drag force magnitude and influencing various physical quantities.

Numerical data confirms that parameters Nf and λ, representing drag force in porous media, impact physical quantities similarly, as expected.

Parameters Nt and Nb exhibit opposite quantifiable impacts on concentration, velocity, and temperature profiles due to their influence on the mathematical model.

In conclusion, the study offers valuable insights into the complex interplay of various parameters in the context of blood flow, providing a foundation for understanding and potentially controlling fluid dynamics in biological systems.

Publisher’s note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author contributions

Y.A., S.A. conceived the idea, designed the study, performed the simulations, analyzed the data, and wrote the manuscript. F.K., and M.D.J. assisted in the simulations, data analysis, and manuscript writing. Y.A. (Yashar Aryanfar), and A.S.H. conducted the experiments, validated the results, and revised the manuscript. M.T., and A.T.S. provided technical guidance, scientific insights, and critical feedback. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Funding

This research was funded by King Saud University through Researchers Supporting Project number (RSPD2024R685), King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.
