---
pmid: '39378056'
doi: 10.1080/17576180.2024.2407228
pmcid: PMC11583603
title: Assessment of mirvetuximab soravtansine immunogenicity in patients with folate
  receptor alpha-positive ovarian cancer.
authors:
- Zhu Fengying
- Tu Ya-Ping
- Sloss Callum
- Wang Yuemei
journal: Bioanalysis
year: 2024
month: null
volume: '16'
issue: 21-22
pages: 1101-1113
is_oa: true
oa_status: green
oa_url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11583603/pdf/IBIO_16_2407228.pdf
cited_by_count: 1
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Female
- Ovarian Neoplasms
- Maytansine
- Folate Receptor 1
- Immunoconjugates
- Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- antibody-drug-conjugate
cancer_types:
- ovarian
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- folate receptor alpha
drugs:
- ADA
- MIRV
- mirvetuximab
- soravtansine
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Virus-based gene therapy research
diseases_annotated:
- ovarian cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 1
icite_rcr: 0.19731711369057411
icite_percentile: 10.2
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
biology_processes: []
resistant_states: []
pathway_targets: []
tissue_categories:
- epithelial
---

# Assessment of mirvetuximab soravtansine immunogenicity in patients with folate receptor alpha-positive ovarian cancer.

## Abstract

Aim: The aim of this research was to evaluate the immunogenicity of mirvetuximab soravtansine (MIRV), an antibody-drug conjugate in patients with folate receptor alpha-positive ovarian cancer across four clinical studies.Materials & methods: An assay was developed and validated for the detection of antidrug antibodies (ADAs) against MIRV. A cell-based method was also developed and validated for the detection of neutralizing anti-MIRV antibodies (NAbs). Both ADAs and NAbs were assessed across four clinical studies in 734 patients.Results: Across studies, MIRV demonstrated low immunogenicity with 7.8% of patients with treatment-emergent ADAs, 7.2% with treatment-unaffected ADAs, and 0.5% with treatment-enhanced ADAs. MIRV trough concentrations were comparable in ADA-negative and ADA-positive individuals. Limited data suggest that MIRV ADAs may be associated with decreased efficacy. Due to the very limited number of NAb-positive individuals, no conclusions could be drawn on the effect of NAb on efficacy.Conclusion: Both the validation tests and the data from the MIRV clinical studies demonstrated that these assays were suitable and reliable for the detection of MIRV ADAs and NAbs. These validated assays will continue to be used to monitor MIRV immunogenicity in future clinical trials.

## Full Text

Assessment of mirvetuximab soravtansine immunogenicity in patients with folate receptor alpha-positive ovarian cancer

Aim: The aim of this research was to evaluate the immunogenicity of mirvetuximab soravtansine (MIRV), an antibody-drug conjugate in patients with folate receptor alpha-positive ovarian cancer across four clinical studies.

Materials & methods: An assay was developed and validated for the detection of antidrug antibodies (ADAs) against MIRV. A cell-based method was also developed and validated for the detection of neutralizing anti-MIRV antibodies (NAbs). Both ADAs and NAbs were assessed across four clinical studies in 734 patients.

Results: Across studies, MIRV demonstrated low immunogenicity with 7.8% of patients with treatment-emergent ADAs, 7.2% with treatment-unaffected ADAs, and 0.5% with treatment-enhanced ADAs. MIRV trough concentrations were comparable in ADA-negative and ADA-positive individuals. Limited data suggest that MIRV ADAs may be associated with decreased efficacy. Due to the very limited number of NAb-positive individuals, no conclusions could be drawn on the effect of NAb on efficacy.

Conclusion: Both the validation tests and the data from the MIRV clinical studies demonstrated that these assays were suitable and reliable for the detection of MIRV ADAs and NAbs. These validated assays will continue to be used to monitor MIRV immunogenicity in future clinical trials.

Plain Language Summary

Mirvetuximab soravtansine (MIRV) is a new drug of cancer treatment that targets a protein called folate receptor alpha, which is often found in certain ovarian cancers that do not respond to platinum-based therapies. To check if patients’ immune systems react to this drug, we developed tests to look for antibodies that may form against MIRV. These antibodies can affect how well the drug works.

The study looked at 734 patients in four different clinical trials. It found that MIRV triggered an immune response in only a small number of patients – 7.8% developed new antibodies after starting treatment. However, most of these antibodies did not seem to impact the effectiveness of the drug, and patients with or without antibodies had similar levels of the drug in their bodies. Some data hinted that having antibodies might slightly reduce how well the drug works, but there were not enough patients who developed these antibodies to be certain. Another test was done to check if certain antibodies blocked MIRV from working, but very few patients (31 out of 734) had these, so no conclusions could be made.

Overall, the tests were shown to work well and will continue to be used in future studies to monitor how patients’ immune systems respond to MIRV.

Graphical Abstract

Article highlights

Mirvetuximab Soravtansine (MIRV) is an antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) approved for treatment of FRα positive, platinum-resistant ovarian cancer.

Assays were developed and validated to detect anti-drug antibodies and neutralizing antibodies against MIRV.

MIRV showed low immunogenicity in 734 patients across four clinical trials.

Limited data suggest that MIRV efficacy may be impacted by the presence of antidrug antibodies.

Background

Ovarian cancer treatment is multifaceted, including surgery, chemotherapy, targeted therapies and immunotherapy. Targeting ovarian cancer with specific drugs represents a significant advancement in treatment. Drugs like poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors can prevent cancer cells from repairing DNA, leading to cell death by inhibiting the PARP enzyme. BRAF inhibitors can specifically inhibit the activity of mutated BRAF proteins, reducing tumor growth. Ongoing research and clinical trials continue to identify new targets and develop drugs that can further enhance treatment effectiveness and precision. Folate receptor alpha (FRα) is another target, often overexpressed on the surface of ovarian cancer cells, which antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) can bind to and deliver toxic agents directly to the cancer cells.

ADCs are precision biotherapeutics. ADCs are composed of an antibody covalently linked to a cytotoxic payload and have shown great promise as cancer treatments including as treatments for gynecologic cancers. The antibody binds to an antigen specific to the tumor cell which leads to internalization, cleavage of the linker, and delivery of the cytotoxic drug to the cancer cell. There are currently 11 US FDA approved ADCs with more in various stages of clinical development, demonstrating the promise of this class of anticancer therapies.

Development of ADCs requires selection of the appropriate antibody target, linker, and cytotoxic payload for delivery to the tumor to achieve maximal anti-tumor efficacy and therapeutic index. ADCs are complex molecules, most of which currently use human or humanized monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). There is a potential for antidrug antibodies (ADAs) and neutralizing antibodies (NAbs) to develop against an ADC. The consequences of immunogenicity can range from no clinical concern to life-threatening side effects. Therefore, development of a risk assessment plan is a critical part of ADC drug development. The incidence of ADAs for early ADCs could be high; however, the low incidence of ADAs reported for recently approved ADCs speaks to the advancements in ADC engineering and risk assessment strategies.

Mirvetuximab soravtansine (MIRV) is a first-in-class ADC with full approval by the FDA for the treatment of FRα-positive platinum-resistant ovarian cancer. MIRV consists of an anti-FRα immunoglobulin G1 antibody and a cytotoxic maytansinoid payload DM4 conjugated by a cleavable disulfide linker. DM4 is a potent anti-mitotic agent that targets tubulin to induce cell-cycle arrest.

The development of immunogenicity is a potential complication for all protein-based therapeutics. Most ADCs currently use human monoclonal antibodies or antibodies that have been engineered to be more human-like. All ADCs with small-molecule payloads could theoretically increase immunogenicity compared with unconjugated therapeutic antibodies. A small molecule, DM4 is the payload component of MIRV. The results of early-phase clinical studies conducted with ADCs containing DM4 suggest that this cytotoxic payload is not associated with significant immunogenicity. Two Phase I studies reported that anti-DM4 antibodies were not detected for ADCs with DM4 payloads. The immunogenicity of MIRV targets the entire ADC including the antibody, linker, and payload with a primary focus on the antibody component, M9346A.

MIRV has demonstrated anti-tumor efficacy in multiple clinical trials. In a Phase I, first-in-human study (Study 0401, NCT01609556), MIRV showed encouraging preliminary anticancer activity especially in patients with ovarian cancer. In a Phase III, randomized, open-label study (FORWARD 1 [Study 0403, NCT02631876]), MIRV was compared with investigator’s choice of chemotherapy (IC) in patients with prior-treated platinum-resistant ovarian cancer. Although there was not a statistically significant improvement in progression-free survival (PFS) compared with chemotherapy for the intent-to-treat population, hazard ratios favored MIRV over IC in PFS and overall survival (OS) in patients who had tumors with high FRα expression. In the Phase III, single-arm SORAYA study (Study 0417, NCT04296890) in patients with prior-treated platinum-resistant ovarian cancer who also had received prior bevacizumab, MIRV demonstrated clinically meaningful antitumor activity. A confirmatory Phase III, open-label, randomized, controlled trial (MIRASOL [Study 0416, NCT04209855]) in patients with prior-treated platinum-resistant ovarian cancer with high FRα expression showed a benefit of MIRV in both PFS and OS compared with IC.

In this manuscript, we report the development and validation of immunogenicity assays for MIRV and MIRV immunogenicity results from these 4 clinical studies. Samples from one Phase I Study 0401 (NCT01609556) and three Phase III studies including Study 0403 (FORWARD 1), Study 0416 (MIRASOL) and Study 0417 (SORAYA) were evaluated for MIRV ADAs and NAbs. Details of the individual studies are listed in Table 1. An anti-MIRV antibody assay was developed, validated and applied as a screening assay, confirmatory assay and titration assay to concurrently detect human antibodies against all components of MIRV, including the anti-FRα antibody, the cleavable disulfide linker, and the cytotoxic maytansinoid, DM4. In addition, a cell-based method was developed and validated for the detection of anti-MIRV NAbs in human plasma samples.

Materials & methods

Two unique and complex assays were developed and validated to measure MIRV ADAs and NAbs in human plasma. An assessment and validation of sensitivity; precision; matrix, hemolysis, and lipid interference; drug tolerance; and analyte stability including reagents and assay controls were performed for each assay.

Materials

For the ADA assay, critical reagents included murine anti-MIRV antibodies (the primary positive control and surrogate ADA), murine antimaytansine antibodies, MIRV, biotinylated MIRV (B-MIRV) and ruthenium-labeled MIRV (Ru-MIRV). Streptavidin (SA)-coated standard bind SECTOR® Imager 6000 96 Well Plates were from Meso-Scale Discovery (MSD, Rockville, MD, L15SA-1). An MSD Sector PR™ 6000 Plate Reader was used to read the ADA assay plates. Human dipotassium ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (K2EDTA) plasma was purchased from BioChemed (Winchester, VA), Biological Specialties Company (Palo Alto, CA) and BioIVT (Hicksville, NY).

For the NAb assay, critical reagents included MIRV, B-MIRV and murine anti-MIRV antibodies. KB cells were purchased from ATCC (Manassas, VA). High Capacity Magne® Streptavidin Beads were from Promega (V7820 or V782X, Madison, WI). Assay plates included Black with Clear Bottom 96-Well Plates (Read) from VWR (82050-748, Radnor, PA), Nunc™ MicroWell™ 96-Well Plates (Polypropylene) from VWR (62408-946) and Zeba™ Spin Desalting Plate from Thermo Fisher Scientific (89808 or equivalent, Waltham, MA). Bioassay plates were Nunc™ Edge 2.0 96-Well Plates (VWR 75800-388 or 75800-390). The number of viable cells was measured with the CellTiter-Glo® Luminescent Cell Viability Assay (Promega). The luminescence signal was detected using a BioTek Cytation 5 Multi-Mode plate reader (Agilent Technologies, Inc., Santa Clara, CA).

Sample collection

Blood samples to assess MIRV immunogenicity were collected. A baseline ADA sample was collected before dosing on Cycle 1 Day 1. Subsequent samples for ADA analysis were collected predose on Day 1 of Cycles 2 through 4, and at the EOT and 30-Day Follow-up visits. Immunogenicity was assessed in pharmacokinetics (PK) samples collected at these timepoints.

Anti-MIRV ADA assay

The quantitative electrochemiluminescent (ECL) assay developed to detect anti-MIRV antibodies in human plasma collected in K2EDTA tubes was designed using a screening assay, a confirmatory assay and a titration assay. Through method validation, the screening, confirmatory and titration assays cut points (expressed as signal to noise ratios for the screening and titration assays and as percent inhibition for the confirmatory assay) were determined using percentiles of pooled data. The cut point was derived from 50 lots of naive human plasma in the presence and absence of 20.0 μg/ml MIRV, analyzed in duplicate in six independent runs. The cut-off concentration of 20.0 μg/ml MIRV used for screening and confirmatory assays was based on the PK observation, where the expected MIRV drug exposure level in patients was approximately 20.0 μg/ml. For the screening assay, since all coefficient of variation estimates were <15% and the responses were already normalized against the negative control, a fixed cut point using a nonparametric method was determined based on the signal to noise values. A fixed cut point for the confirmatory assay was determined using a nonparametric method based on percent inhibition. A fixed cut point was also determined for the titration assay based on signal to noise. All cut points were evaluated statistically based on Shankar et al..

All incubations were carried out in sealed plates on a plate shaker. SA-MSD 96-well plates were incubated with blocking buffer at room temperature for 1–4 h. Plasma samples and controls were diluted 1:2 in 30% ethanol and incubated for 8–12 min at room temperature to disrupt drug-antibody complexes. For the screening and titration assays, 20 μl of the ethanol-treated samples/controls were incubated with Ru-MIRV and B-MIRV. For the confirmatory assay, a first set of 20 μl of the ethanol-treated samples/controls was incubated with Ru-MIRV and B-MIRV and a second set of samples/controls was incubated with Ru-MIRV, B-MIRV and MIRV (inhibition). Plates for all three assays (screening, confirmatory and titration) were incubated for 1 h ± 10 min protected from light.

After the incubations, samples/controls were transferred to the blocked, washed SA-MSD plates in duplicate and incubated for 1 h ± 10 min protected from light. SA-MSD plates containing samples/controls were then washed. MSD Read buffer was added to the washed plates, and the plates were immediately read. The formation of Ru-MIRV/anti-MIRV antibody/B-MIRV immune complexes was detected in the presence of tripropylamine-containing read buffer, such that the ruthenium on the immune complex produced a signal. Only samples that contained Ru-MIRV/anti-MIRV antibody/B-MIRV immune complexes generated an ECL signal.

Samples equal to or above the fixed cut point for the screening assay were classified as “potentially positive.” Samples below the cut point were classified as negative. “Potentially positive” samples were tested in the confirmatory assay. Antibody titers for confirmed positive samples from confirmatory assay were determined by testing diluted samples until a negative response was obtained. The sample titer was reported as the reciprocal of the highest dilution that produced a response above the cut point.

Sensitivity curves were prepared with different concentrations of murine anti-MIRV or anti-maytansine antibodies in blank human plasma containing K2EDTA. The sensitivity curves were used to calculate the low positive control (LPC) for the assay. Three independent preparations of serial dilutions per run were analyzed for a total of 12 sensitivity assessments. The overall relative sensitivity was calculated as the mean of the 12 assessments. Two analysts participated in the experiment, and each completed two runs per antibody. Relative ADA assay sensitivity was calculated for each curve using the following formula: 

Blank human plasma containing K2EDTA was used to prepare the high positive control (HPC) with 30,000 ng/ml murine anti-MIRV antibody and the LPC based on the sensitivity curve analysis murine anti-MIRV antibody. The negative control for the ADA assay was ten drug-naive individual lots of blank human plasma containing K2EDTA.

Matrix interference was evaluated in ten individual unspiked human plasma lots, ten spiked with murine anti-MIRV antibodies at the LPC concentration derived in the sensitivity assay, and ten spiked with murine anti-MIRV antibodies at the HPC concentration (30,000 ng/ml). Targeted acceptance criteria were signal to noise values within ±20% recovery of the spiked sample.

Screening & confirmatory assays

The screening and confirmatory assay cut points were determined using 50 individual lots of human plasma containing K2EDTA, which were analyzed naive or with added MIRV. Based on preliminary confirmatory assays conducted during assay development, 20.0 μg/ml MIRV was used for the confirmatory cut point testing. Samples were analyzed in duplicate in six independent runs, with data analyzed by multiple analysts over multiple days. The screening and confirmatory cut point analyses were performed using SAS 9.2 on unrounded values.

Responses were normalized to the negative control, and all coefficient of variation estimates were <15% across the data from the six assays. Therefore, a fixed cut point using a nonparametric analysis was determined based on signal to noise values for the screening assay. The screening assay cut point calculated using the upper 95% CI was 1.11 (signal to noise).

For the confirmatory assay, ratios of MIRV inhibited samples versus uninhibited samples were used to calculate the percent signal inhibition with the following formula: % signal inhibition = 100 × (1 - ratio), where ratio is mean inhibited relative light units divided by mean uninhibited relative light units. The nonparametric approach with non-transformed data was used for the analysis. The cut point for samples to be considered confirmed positive was ≥30.2% inhibition for human plasma.

The LPC for the ADA assay was originally set as 500 ng/mL. However, after the RAS runs, the LPC was calculated as 64.0 ng/ml (mean assay sensitivity + t0.01, degrees of freedom [df] * standard deviation [SD]), where df = n-1. To confirm the LPC concentration, the LPC was prepared at 64.2, 128, and 259 ng/mL and analyzed in multiple replicates, uninhibited and inhibited with MIRV (20 μg/mL). The LPC concentration of 64.2 ng/mL was confirmed positive using the non-parametric confirmatory cut point of 30.2%. The overall assay sensitivity was 35.7 ng/mL for anti-MIRV antibodies and 2.09 ng/mL for anti-maytansine antibodies.

In the matrix interference assay in human plasma, 10/10 unspiked samples measured below the cut point. All of the spiked samples were classified as positive. For the spiked samples at the LPC concentration (64.2 ng/mL), 5/10 met the targeted acceptance criteria and 8/10 spiked samples at the HPC concentration (30,000 ng/ml) met the targeted acceptance criteria. Although the data for the matrix interference samples spiked at the LPC concentration did not meet the targeted acceptance criteria recovery, the samples were above the assay cut point and would still be identified as potentially positive samples.

The drug tolerance limit was defined as the highest concentration of MIRV that did not increase sample results to levels below the assay cut point. Drug tolerance was assessed using HPC (30,000 ng/ml murine anti-MIRV antibody) and LPC (64.2 ng/ml murine anti-MIRV antibody) samples at MIRV concentrations of 0.0, 2.04, 8.16, 20.4, 40.8 and 102 μg/ml. At the HPC, the drug tolerance was ≥51.0 μg/ml. At the LPC, the drug tolerance was 10.2 μg/ml in the first run and 20.4 μg/ml in a second run. The drug tolerance for the LPC was reported using the more conservative concentration of ≥10.2 μg/ml MIRV.

Titration assay

The titration assay measured antibody titer to estimate the concentration or relative amount of antibody present in the sample. The end point titer was calculated as the reciprocal of the highest antibody dilution that gave a signal to noise ratio above the cut point. The highest titer (reciprocal dilution) that had a signal to noise ratio greater than the assay cut point was reported as the final sample titer.

The intra-assay and interassay precision of the titration assay was evaluated using fourfold dilutions of the HPC in the negative control and serial dilution of the 4 dilutions, respectively. The intra-assay and interassay titration precision met the targeted acceptance criteria since the titer results were within one fourfold dilution of each other. The cut point at the upper 99.0% CI, 1.17 (signal to noise), was used as the titer cut point for this method.

Immunogenicity

ADA categories included seronegative (negative at baseline and postbaseline), treatment emergent (negative at baseline and positive postbaseline), treatment unaffected (positive at baseline with a postdose titer increase of ≤4×), and treatment enhanced (positive at baseline with a postdose titer increase of ≥4×).

In this manuscript, it is essential to clarify the categorization of ADAs for the interpretation of study results. Throughout this analysis, seronegative and treatment-unaffected categories are considered ADA negative, while treatment-emergent and treatment-enhanced categories are considered ADA positive. This classification approach was adopted to differentiate between ADA responses that are unaffected by treatment and those that emerge or are enhanced post-treatment. Notably, the designation of treatment unaffected as ADA negative reflects instances where the presence of ADAs does not correlate with treatment exposure, suggesting that the MIRV drug itself does not elicit an immune response.

NAb antibody assay

Samples that were confirmed positive in the ADA assay were tested for NAb activity. A cell-based assay was developed and validated to detect NAb to MIRV in human plasma. KB cells were grown in T-75 flasks in a 5% ± 1% CO2 incubator at 37°C ± 2°C with ≥70% humidity. The negative control was pooled by healthy normal human plasma + cells. The drug control was MIRV + pooled healthy normal human plasma + cells. The positive control was MIRV + anti-MIRV antibodies + pooled healthy normal human plasma + cells.

All incubations prior to the bioassay were carried out at room temperature in sealed plates on a plate shaker. Plasma samples with ≤3% hemolysis and control samples were treated with glycine in 96-well polypropylene plates and covered and incubated for 60 ± 10 min to disrupt antibody complexes. Plasma samples >3% hemolyzed were not analyzed. Samples were then treated with a capture solution containing B-MIRV for 90 ± 10 min. SA-coated magnetic beads were added, and the plates were incubated for 60 ± 10 min to capture the B-MIRV/ADA complexes. The beads were sedimented using a magnetic plate, and unbound material was removed by washing. Glycine was then added to the sedimented, washed beads and the plates were incubated for 10–13 min to disrupt the captured MIRV/ADA complexes. The beads were then sedimented by magnet, and the acidified samples/controls were transferred to a new polypropylene plate and neutralized. The samples/controls were then desalted in preparation for the bioassay.

Cells (75 μl of a 2.4×104 cells/ml) were plated in 96-well bioassay plates and incubated for 2–4.25 h. During this time, samples/controls were processed with fixed concentrations of MIRV for 60 ± 10 min at 37°C. The control/sample/MIRV mixture (75 μl) was added to the bioassay plates in duplicate and incubated at a 5% ± 1% CO2 incubator at 37°C ± 2°C and at least 70% humidity for 91 ± 3 h. The bioassay plates were allowed to come to room temperature for 55–67 min, protected from light, prior to evaluation of the number of viable cells.

The number of viable cells was measured by detecting the luminescence signal. Proliferation was inhibited in the presence of MIRV in the assay and was not inhibited in the presence of NAbs to MIRV. Therefore, there was a higher luminescent signal in samples containing NAbs.

Sensitivity curves were prepared with different concentrations of murine anti-MIRV antibodies in the normal control plasma pool. Samples were analyzed in nine runs at n = 1 per plate by two analysts over ≥3 days. The average was calculated for each sample from the runs.

Matrix selectivity/interference was evaluated using plasma samples from normal healthy individuals or in ten samples from ovarian cancer human plasma unspiked or spiked with murine anti-MIRV antibodies at the LPC. At least 8/10 unspiked sample results (≥80%) must be negative and at least 9/10 spiked sample results (≥90%) must be positive to accept the results.

Analysis of the NAb assay cut point for normal human plasma was determined statistically using 40 individual healthy normal human plasma samples in six assays by two different analysts on at least 2 different days. The fixed assay cut point for normal human plasma was determined to be 1.35 (upper bound 99% limit of prediction interval, which gave a false positive percentage of 1.80%). The fixed assay cut point for ovarian cancer human plasma was determined statistically from analysis of 100 individual samples in at least two assays by at least two analysts on at least 2 days. The fixed assay cut point for ovarian cancer human plasma was 1.37 (upper bound 99% limit of prediction interval, which gave a false positive percentage of 1.10%).

Assay sensitivity was determined to be 168 ng/mL from the sensitivity curve analysis. The proposed LPC for this assay was 586 ng/mL to target a 1% failure rate. Because this LPC resulted in several plate failures, the LPC was adjusted to 650 ng/ml for the final method.

In the matrix selectivity assay, overall, in normal healthy plasma, 14/14 unspiked samples were negative and 10/10 spiked samples were positive. In ovarian cancer human plasma, overall, 10/10 unspiked samples were negative and 9/10 spiked samples were positive. Therefore, the criteria for acceptance were met for matrix selectivity for the NAb assay.

The drug tolerance of the NAb assay was determined by analyzing antibody in the presence of increasing concentrations of MIRV. Samples were incubated at room temperature for ≥1 h prior to analysis. Drug tolerance to detect MIRV NAbs for the high (5000 ng/ml) positive control was 1000 ng/ml excess MIRV. For the medium (1000 ng/ml) positive control samples, drug tolerance to detect MIRV NAbs was up to 2000 ng/ml excess MIRV. Drug tolerance to detect MIRV NAbs for the low (586 ng/ml) positive control was 0.0 ng/ml excess MIRV.

Statistical analysis

The confirmatory cut point analysis of the ADA assay was performed using SAS 9.2. For each sample, the ratio of the response of the inhibited sample versus the response of the uninhibited sample was calculated. All analyses were performed using the ratio but were displayed as percent inhibition. The screening assay cut point analysis of the NAb assay was performed using SAS 9.4. The Kaplan–Meier method was used in analyzing survival data. The process involves calculating survival probabilities at specific time points where events occur and plotting these probabilities as a step function which represents the probability of survival over time.

Ethical considerations

All the clinical studies in this research were reviewed and approved by an independent ethics committee or institutional review board at all sites where the studies were conducted (see Supplementary Information). These four studies were conducted in accordance with Good Clinical Practice and the International Conference on Harmonization Good Clinical Practice Guidelines and compliance with the ethical principles described in the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was obtained from all patients prior to start of the study.

Results

Immunogenicity analysis of MIRV

The clinical database for this study consisted of 734 patients with evaluable ADA samples from the 4 clinical studies. The studies included a diverse patient population with varying levels of prior treatment and disease severity.

The number of patients in each immunogenicity category in each study and across studies, along with titer range and NAb status, is shown in Table 2. The majority of patients, ranging from 73.9 to 96.0%, were ADA negative (negative at baseline and postbaseline) in every study. A total of 620 (84.5%) patients were ADA negative across all four studies. There were 57 (7.8%) treatment-emergent ADA-positive patients across studies, and 53 (7.2%) treatment-unaffected ADA-positive patients across studies. Only 4 (0.5%) patients were treatment-enhanced ADA-positive across all studies, with 2 of the studies having no treatment-enhanced ADA-positive patients. The ADA titer range was <50 to 109,350 across studies. Of the confirmed positive samples tested for NAb, 31 patients were NAb positive, 69 patients were NAb negative and three patients were a mix of NAb positive and negative. Only 31 patients were NAb positive, indicating a low overall incidence of NAbs. However, the potential impact of NAbs on treatment efficacy is worth investigating as these antibodies can potentially neutralize MIRV's therapeutic effect.

Figure 1 shows a detailed look at the time-course for ADA titers (mean ± SD) from Cycle (C) 1 Day (D) 1 to follow-up in ADA-positive patients who were treated with MIRV and were categorized as treatment emergent or treatment enhanced after MIRV treatment. At C1D1, the mean ± SD ADA titer was 175 ± 166 (n = 4). End of trial titers peaked at 1471 ± 1621 (n = 7), suggesting the immune response to MIRV was delayed and variable among patients, and decreased at follow-up to 1019 ± 1726 (n = 13). The decrease in titers during follow-up period indicates that the immune response may diminish over time after the treatment. Samples were not collected for cycles after C4D1 until the end of the trial.

Correlation of ADA/NAb status with PK & efficacy

Figure 2 shows the mean trough concentrations of MIRV during C1 and C3, at the end of treatment, and at follow-up from Study 0416. At each ADA sampling time point, the trough concentration of MIRV was comparable in ADA-negative individuals compared with ADA-positive individuals across treatment-emergent, treatment-enhanced and treatment unaffected categories. The data suggests that the presence of ADAs may not significantly alter the PK of MIRV. This implies that while ADAs are present, they may not always impact MIRV drug levels in the bloodstream.

Figure 3 shows the tabular data and the Kaplan-Meier curve for PFS for ADA-positive and ADA-negative patient data pooled for the intent-to-treat populations from Studies 0416 and 0417. The number of ADA-positive patients is limited (n = 31) compared with the number of ADA-negative patients (n = 255) included in the analysis. This limited dataset suggests that the presence of MIRV ADAs may be associated with decreased MIRV efficacy. The median (95% CI) PFS was 5.52 months (4.37, 5.95) in the ADA-negative subgroup and 3.20 months (1.68, 5.85) in the ADA-positive subgroup. However, given the limited data, further investigation in larger studies is warranted.

To evaluate the impact of NAb status on efficacy, Kaplan-Meier curves and tabular results for OS are provided for NAb-positive versus NAb-negative patient data pooled for the intent-to-treat populations from Studies 0416 and 0417 (Figure 4). As with the ADA data, there was a low number of NAb-positive patients available for analysis (n = 13) compared with the number of NAb-negative patients (n = 273). The median (95% CI) OS was 17.54 months (15.41, 24.57) for the NAb-negative subgroup and 8.18 months (6.08, 13.50) for the NAb-positive patients. However, the limited data precluded meaningful interpretation of the inconsistent differences in the OS of the Kaplan–Meier estimates for NAb-negative and NAb-positive patients in this analysis. This difference suggests that NAbs could have a profound impact on treatment outcomes.

Discussion

Eleven ADCs, including MIRV, have been approved by the FDA for cancer treatment with more in development. MIRV is an ADC that binds with high affinity and specificity to FRα expressed at high levels in ovarian cancer and is approved for the treatment of FRα-positive ovarian cancer. Because immunogenicity or the potential for development of ADAs or NAbs can occur with ADC treatment, assays were successfully developed and validated to measure the potential immunogenicity of MIRV. The ADA assay simultaneously measured ADAs to the mAb, linker and toxic payload of MIRV in human plasma. A functional cell-based assay was also developed to measure MIRV NAbs. The assays were robust and highly sensitive, capable of detecting low levels of ADAs and NAbs. One challenge encountered was the potential interference from circulating drug levels, which could mask the presence of low titer antibodies. To address this, the assay was validated to ensure that drug tolerance did not impact the detection of ADAs. Through the analysis of study data, it demonstrated that the drug tolerance was suitable for the detection of the ADAs and NAbs of the patient samples from MIRV clinical studies. It is crucial for ensuring the immunogenicity data accurately reflects the true incidence of ADAs in the patient population.

The data from patients in four MIRV Phase I and Phase III clinical studies demonstrated a low incidence of ADA development with most patients ADA negative at baseline and throughout the study. The studies included a pivotal Phase 3 study comparing MIRV versus IC (Study 0416); a single-arm, Phase III study (Study 0417); a Phase I, first-in-human, dose escalation and expansion study (Study 0401); and a Phase III, randomized study (Study 0403). Treatment-emergent MIRV ADAs were low (7.8% of patients) and treatment-unaffected ADAs in patients who were positive at baseline were also low (7.2% of patients). Only 0.5% of patients across studies developed treatment-enhanced ADAs. There was also a low level of NAb development, with the majority of confirmed positive samples being NAb negative.

This low immunogenicity may be attributed to the use of a humanized monoclonal antibody and the careful design of the linker-payload complex, which minimizes the likelihood of triggering an immune response. In other words, the relatively low ADA incidence in MIRV treated patients could be indicative of its well-tolerated design.

Although the overall incidence of ADAs and NAbs was low, the presence of ADAs may still have clinical implications. MIRV trough concentrations at each sampling time point between ADA-negative and ADA-positive patients were comparable, suggesting that MIRV ADAs may have a minimal impact on MIRV PK. However, given the limited number of patients available for analysis, differences in MIRV antitumor efficacy for ADA-negative and ADA-positive patients could not be determined, though the data suggested a trend toward decreased efficacy in ADA-positive patients as evidenced by a shorter PFS compared with ADA-negative patients. This finding underscores the need for close monitoring of immunogenicity in patients receiving MIRV treatment.

Given the potential impact of ADAs and NAbs on therapeutic efficacy, future clinical studies should continue to monitor immunogenicity. With more ADA and NAb data, meaningful interpretations can be drawn. Additionally, future studies should focus on long-term immunogenicity monitoring, particularly in patients who receive MIRV over an extended period, beyond Cycle 4.

Conclusion

A sensitive and specific ECL-based assay was developed and validated for the detection of MIRV ADA in human plasma samples, and an assay was validated for the detection of MIRV NAb in human plasma. Both the validation tests and study data demonstrated that these assays were suitable and reliable for the detection of ADAs and NAbs in patient samples obtained from MIRV clinical studies.

There was a low rate of ADA incidence and NAb development in patients treated with MIRV across four clinical studies. There was no clinically meaningful difference in the trough concentrations of MIRV between ADA-positive and ADA-negative patients. The effect of ADAs on MIRV effectiveness has not been fully characterized. Based on limited data, the presence of anti-MIRV antibodies may be associated with decreased efficacy in ADA-positive patients when compared with ADA-negative patients. These validated ADA and NAb MIRV assays will continue to be used to monitor MIRV immunogenicity in future clinical trials.

Author contributions

F Zhu and Y-P Tu made substantial contributions to the conception or design of the work; or the acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data for the work; drafted and revised the work for important intellectual content; provided final approval for the version to be published; and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved. C Sloss and Y Wang provided final approval for the version to be published and agrees to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved.

Financial disclosure

This study was funded by ImmunoGen, Inc. Waltham, Massachusetts, USA which is now part of AbbVie. The authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript apart from those disclosed.

Competing interests disclosure

All authors are employees of ImmunoGen (now part of AbbVie) and own company stock. The authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript. This includes employment, consultancies, honoraria, stock ownership or options, expert testimony, grants or patents received or pending, or royalties.

Writing disclosure

Medical writing support was provided by AC Porter ISMPP CMPPTM of Certara, funded by ImmunoGen, Inc. which is now part of AbbVie.
