---
pmid: '39390431'
doi: 10.1186/s12885-024-13011-0
pmcid: PMC11465588
title: Newcastle disease virus enhances the antitumor efficacy of Doxorubicin in a
  cervical cancer mouse model.
authors:
- Rasekhi Kazeruni Aezam
- Babaei Nahid
- Esmaeili Gouvarchin Ghaleh Hadi
- Doosti Abbas
- Farzanehpour Mahdieh
journal: BMC cancer
year: 2024
month: 10
volume: '24'
issue: '1'
pages: '1253'
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: https://bmccancer.biomedcentral.com/counter/pdf/10.1186/s12885-024-13011-0
cited_by_count: 3
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Female
- Uterine Cervical Neoplasms
- Doxorubicin
- Newcastle disease virus
- Mice
- Disease Models, Animal
- Oncolytic Virotherapy
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Mice, Inbred C57BL
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Antibiotics, Antineoplastic
- Humans
- Oncolytic Viruses
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- oncolytic-virus
cancer_types:
- cervical
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes:
- IFN-gamma
- IL-4
- TGF-beta
- TNF-alpha
drugs:
- Doxo
- Doxorubicin
- 'NO'
- PBS
- nitric oxide
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Virus-based gene therapy research
diseases_annotated:
- CC
- Cervical cancer
- cancer
- cervical cancer
- cervical tumors
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 3
icite_rcr: 0.8475822488394956
icite_percentile: 44.2
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Newcastle disease virus enhances the antitumor efficacy of Doxorubicin in a cervical cancer mouse model.

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND AND AIMS**: Cervical cancer (CC) is a common cancer among women, often treated with Doxorubicin (Doxo). Research is underway to explore the use of oncolytic virus (OV) therapy as a means to improve drug efficacy and enhance the immune system's tumor-fighting capabilities. Hence, our study purposes to evaluate the therapeutic potential of Newcastle disease virus (NDV) in increasing the antitumor efficacy of Doxo in mouse models of CC.

**METHODS AND MATERIALS**: TC1 cells were administered to C57BL/6 mice (Female) in a range of 6 to 8 weeks age (n = 40) to induce tumor growth. After tumor development, four treatment groups of mice were formed. Treatment were performed through NDV, Doxo, and a combination of both in three groups of treatment twice in a one-week intervention manner, while the control group treated with PBS. Following the last treatment, half of these mice were subjected to euthanize due to the immune-response assessment, and the other half were followed up till they died naturally in a certain period of time.

**RESULTS**: Mice that underwent the combined treatment showed significantly improved survival rates and slower tumor progression in comparison with the control group. This combined treatment substantially elevated nitric oxide (NO) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels in the splenocytes cultures of mice bearing cervical tumors. Furthermore, combination therapy resulted in a notable elevation in TNF-α, IL-12, and IFN-γ, secretion alongside a reduction in the release of TGF-β and IL-4 within the splenocytes in counter with the treatment of just NDV or Doxo.

**CONCLUSION**: According to the findings of this study, it seems that utilizing NDV can improve the effectiveness of Doxo in a mouse model of CC, suggesting it can serve as an adjunct therapy alongside chemotherapy.

## Full Text

Newcastle disease virus enhances the antitumor efficacy of Doxorubicin in a cervical cancer mouse model

Background and aims

Cervical cancer (CC) is a common cancer among women, often treated with Doxorubicin (Doxo). Research is underway to explore the use of oncolytic virus (OV) therapy as a means to improve drug efficacy and enhance the immune system’s tumor-fighting capabilities. Hence, our study purposes to evaluate the therapeutic potential of Newcastle disease virus (NDV) in increasing the antitumor efficacy of Doxo in mouse models of CC.

Methods and materials

TC1 cells were administered to C57BL/6 mice (Female) in a range of 6 to 8 weeks age (n = 40) to induce tumor growth. After tumor development, four treatment groups of mice were formed. Treatment were performed through NDV, Doxo, and a combination of both in three groups of treatment twice in a one-week intervention manner, while the control group treated with PBS. Following the last treatment, half of these mice were subjected to euthanize due to the immune-response assessment, and the other half were followed up till they died naturally in a certain period of time.

Results

Mice that underwent the combined treatment showed significantly improved survival rates and slower tumor progression in comparison with the control group. This combined treatment substantially elevated nitric oxide (NO) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels in the splenocytes cultures of mice bearing cervical tumors. Furthermore, combination therapy resulted in a notable elevation in TNF-α, IL-12, and IFN-γ, secretion alongside a reduction in the release of TGF-β and IL-4 within the splenocytes in counter with the treatment of just NDV or Doxo.

Conclusion

According to the findings of this study, it seems that utilizing NDV can improve the effectiveness of Doxo in a mouse model of CC, suggesting it can serve as an adjunct therapy alongside chemotherapy.

Introduction

Cervical cancer (CC) affects a significant number of women around the world, ranking fourth in incidence and seventh among all types of cancer. According to the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) database, in 2020, there were estimated the incidence of 604,000 and the mortality of 341,000 cases worldwide. The primary cause of death in CC patients is metastasis to other parts of the body. Current treatments for advanced CC, which include radiation therapy and chemotherapy, have limited success rates. A standard spectrum of therapies for CC treatment include chemotherapy (CT), radiotherapy (RT), and surgery, based on the stage and severity. Doxo, a powerful chemotherapy drug, has been used at various stages of CC as a primary or adjuvant treatment. Doxo primarily works by intercalating into DNA, leading to the enzyme inhibition of the topoisomerase II. This process impedes transcription and replication of DNA, ultimately leading to cell death. However, the exact mechanisms by which Doxo affects the molecular and metabolic pathways in CC remain poorly understood. The advancement of high-throughput technologies has enabled researchers to explore complex biological systems at various levels, including genes and metabolites. Current chemotherapeutic drugs have limited efficacy against recurrent CC, underscoring the need for innovative therapeutic approaches in advanced cases. Immunotherapy, which includes oncolytic viruses (OVs), tumor vaccines, targeted therapy, immune cell therapy, and immune checkpoint inhibitors, has emerged as a prominent field alongside traditional treatments such as surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy in tumor treatment. The use of OVs in cancer treatment has advanced rapidly in recent years, thanks to genetic engineering and molecular biology. These viruses have been used to assess the effectiveness of anticancer treatments in vivo and in vitro. One such virus is NDV, a highly infectious avian pathogen in the Avulavirus genus of the Paramyxoviridae family. Although NDV is harmful to birds, it poses minimal risk to humans as it does not cause severe illness. Most people are immune to NDV, rendering any immune response elicited by the virus negligible. While highly virulent strains of NDV can infect humans, they typically cause only mild symptoms, such as fever and cough. Two types of viruses affect tumors differently: oncolytic strains induce syncytia formation in tumor cells, while non-oncolytic strains slow tumor growth and may extend survival. The effectiveness of both types in eradicating human tumor cells remains unclear. NDV has shown efficacy in targeting a range of human tumors, including liver cancer, glioblastoma, and lymphoma. Numerous dormant tumor cells, such as tumor stem cells, may not respond to chemotherapy or radiation therapy; however, they are likely susceptible to targeting by NDV. Oncolytic NDV replicates abundantly in human cancer cells, achieving replication rates of up to 10,000-fold. It selectively targets and eradicates tumor cells under laboratory conditions, demonstrating anti-tumor effects in human tumor models. However, oncolytic NDV does not replicate in or harm non-transformed human cells. Accordingly, this research purposes to evaluate the therapeutic effects of NDV in enhancing the anti-tumor efficacy of Doxo in mouse models of CC.

Materials and methods

Cells and culture conditions

The TC-1 cells were obtained from the cell bank of Iran Pasteur Institute in Tehran. Cell culture were performed in DMEM medium containing FBS (10%) and maintained at 37 °C with CO2 (5%) and humidity (95%.)

Tumor induction in mice and study design

C57BL/6 female mice, at the age of 6 to 8 weeks, were purchased from the Iran Pasteur Institute. The experimental protocols approval were acquired from the Bushehr University Medical Ethics Committee for Animal Studies and adhered to the Ministry of Health guidelines in Iran (IR.BPUMS.REC.1401.209). The mice were maintained in an environment with controlled temperature from 22 to 24 °C and a 12-hour cycle of light and dark. Standard food and water were prepared under ad libitum and acclimatized for one week before receiving a subcutaneous injection of 1 × 10⁵ live tumor cells into their left flanks. Upon tumor development, four groups of ten mice were haphazardly separated. All treatments involved Intra-tumoral injections: the first group (control mice) were treated with 100 µl of PBS; the second group treated with the LaSota NDV strain (10⁸ PFU/100 µl); the third group treated with Doxo (10 mg/kg); and the fourth group treated with a combination of NDV and Doxo, administered at one-week intervals. Tumor growth was closely monitored, and the volume of tumor was evaluated using this formulation: volume = (height × width × length × 0.5236). One week after the final treatment, half of the mice were euthanized through a mixture of 100 mg/kg of ketamine and 10 mg/kg of xylazine administered intraperitoneally. This was performed to comprehensively assess their immune responses.

Cytokine evaluation

Passing a week of the final treatment, euthaniza were performed for half of the mice to analyze spleen cells cytokine release. Spleen cells were separated under sterile conditions, and suspensions of single splenocytes were provided in DMEM medium containing FBS (10%). A cell lysate of Red blood cells (RBC) were prepared through lysis buffer of RBC. The cells were cultured in plates containing 24 wells (2 × 10⁶ cells/well) and exposed to tumor cell-extracted antigens (20 µg/ml) through freeze-thaw cycles. After 72 h, the supernatants were separated, and then the secretion of TNF-α, TGF-β, IL-4, IL-12, and IFN-γ, were quantified using ELISA, based on the protocols (ZellBio GmbH, Germany).

Proliferation index (PI)

The proliferation of lymphocyte in splenocytes were evaluated through MTT assay. The seeding of cells in 96-well plates (1 × 10⁵ cells/100 µl/well) were performed using DMEM medium containing FBS (10%), and treated with tumor cell-extracted antigens (20 µg/ml) through freeze-thaw cycles and incubated for 72 h. Then, 20 µl of MTT solution (5 mg/ml) were treated and incubated at 37 °C for four hours. Subsequently, formazan crystals were dissolved by adding DMSO (150 µl) and finally the microplate reader measured optical density (OD) at 550 nm.

Cytotoxicity assay

Cytotoxicity was assessed using a detection kit of LDH (Takara Company, Tehran, Iran) and recruiting a colorimetric approach to measure impaired cell’s LDH release. This assay uses the stability of a cytoplasmic enzyme, LDH, that found in various types of cell. After washing effector (Splenocytes) and target (TC1 cell line) cells through RPMI 1640 medium and co-culturing them at a 50:1 ratio in specific plates (round bottom) for 6 h at 37 °C, the supernatants were centrifuged and moved to another plates (flat-bottom). Subsequently, after adding the LDH detection compound (100 µl) to each well and 30 min incubation at 25 °C, the OD at 490 nm was read utilizing a microplate reader. The toxicity of cells (percentile) was calculated using this equation:

Cytotoxicity (%) = (experimental release–spontaneous target release–spontaneous effector release) / (maximal target release–spontaneous target release) × 100.

Nitric oxide level in the spleen cells

Nitric oxide secretion was evaluated through determining the level of nitrite in spleen cell culture supernatants using the Griess compound. Passing the culturing time, supernatants free of cells (50 µl) and Griess compound (50 µl) were combined and incubated in the dark. The intake rate (540 nm) was assessed with a microplate reader, and the nitrite concentration was determined using a standard curve.

Statistical analysis

The data for quantitative variables, including the mean and standard deviation indices, were presented in this study. The study groups were compared using both analysis of variance and LSD post hoc tests. We used SPSS software version 24 to create tables and conduct statistical analysis, as well as GraphPad software (8.2.1) to produce figures. The survival function from lifetime data was evaluated based on the Kaplan-Meier estimator. Significant thresholds were defined as P < 0.05.

Result

Analysis indicated that mice receiving the combined treatment were survived in a higher rate than those in the NDV, Doxo, and control groups (Fig. 1A). All groups of treatment demonstrated a substantial elevation of survival rates in comparison with the control group (P < 0.05). Additionally, mice receiving the combined therapy exhibited slower tumor growth rates than the other groups. Moreover, a significant reduction in tumor size was observed in all groups of treatment in comparison with the control group (P < 0.05) (Fig. 1B).

Cytokine assay results showed a substantial elevation of TNF-α, IL-12, and IFN-γ, levels following combined treatment (Fig. 2), along with a decreased in TGF-β and IL-4 secretion in the spleen cells in comparison with to the control group. The pattern of cytokine modulation was showing resemblance in the NDV and Doxo treatment groups (Fig. 2), both significantly different from the control group. The combined treatment group demonstrated better outcomes than the individual therapy groups.

Figure 3 shows that the combined treatment group, along with Doxo and NDV, resulted in an increase in the PI. Notably, the combined treatment group exhibited a higher PI than the single treatments and the control groups.

The findings showed a significant increase in LDH release rates in all groups of treatment in comparison with the control group. Notably, the combined treatment group exhibited the highest release rate (Fig. 4).

A substantial increase in NO production was observed in all groups of treatment in comparison with the control group. Also, the combined treatment group demonstrated the highest level of NO production (Fig. 5).

Discussion

Our research purposes to investigate the NDV treatment effects in enhancing the anti-tumor efficacy of Doxo in mouse models of CC. The findings revealed that mice receiving the combined treatment had better survival rates and slower tumor growth compared to the control group. Chemotherapy drugs can kill both cancerous and healthy cells, leading to side effects like anemia and hair loss. Doxo is a highly effective chemotherapy drug used clinically to treat various cancers, including CC. However, like other conventional chemotherapy drugs, it does not selectively target cancer cells, which can harm healthy cells. Targeted therapies focus on molecules unique to cancer cells, resulting in increased effectiveness and fewer side effects compared to traditional chemotherapy. Targeted therapy aims to address the mechanisms that make tumors resistant to drugs. This remains a significant challenge in current cancer treatment methods. OVs, such as NDV, are an essential component of cancer therapy. NDV is a natural virus that specifically targets cancer cells, spares normal cells, triggers adaptive immunity against tumors, and is acknowledged as a crucial element in cancer treatment by researchers. In 2020, a study by Hassan et al. represented that the NDV LaSota strain exhibited anti-cancer properties tackling both mammary adenocarcinoma of mouse and breast cancer cells. NDV replication occurs autonomously from host cell DNA replication. The mechanisms of hindering cancer cells seem to process with cytolysis or viral replication that effectively overcome treatment resistance in tumor cells by triggering apoptosis. NDV provoke cancer cells death through inducing apoptotic receptors and pathways of mitochondria. The most effective cancer treatment approaches often involve combining drugs to reduce dosages and minimize side effects. Recent studies indicate that wild-type NDV strains can treat cancer without harming healthy cells. Researchers have found that NDV can destroy cancer cells while leaving healthy cells unharmed. Another study revealed that NDV can increase apoptosis in cancer cells, and NDV treatment can decrease cancer cell viability by inducing apoptosis. Faranoush et al. (2023) found that combining NDV with Doxo increased the gene expression of P-21, P-27, and P-53, while decreasing VEGF, VEGF-R, CD-34, and Integrin Alpha 5, gene expression. This combination enhanced the production of ROS, provoke apoptotic cell death, decrease tumor volume, substantially optimize prognosis, and had no harmful effects on normal tissues in animal studies. The literature review confirms the anti-cancer effects of NDV and Doxo. Th1 cells producing IFN-γ and IL-12 exhibit anti-cancer properties, while Th2 cells generating IL-10 and IL-4 support the humoral immune-response. Unlike Th1, the Th2 response may promote cancer progression by inhibiting IFN-γ secretion through IL-4. The study suggests that NDV and Doxo increase Th1 cytokines. NDV can be used as a secure treatment with no harm for normal cells and might be complemented with other cancer drugs to improve efficacy, prolong survival, reduce chemotherapy side effects, and enhance quality of life. The confined investigation into different doses of doxorubicin to identify the lowest dose with the greatest synergistic effect was one of our research limitations, which will be explored in future studies.

Conclusion

Our results revealed that NDV has an inherent ability to enhance the effectiveness of Doxo in cancer-bearing animal models, a finding that has been validated clinically. Female mouse models were treated with NDV in this experiment. Unlike chemotherapy, NDV has fewer temporary side effects in humans that typically disappear within 1 to 2 days. Given the significant side effects associated with chemotherapy drugs like Doxo, this method can serve as a supplementary therapy to reduce side effects and improve anti-tumor effectiveness. It also offers a fresh perspective on utilizing oncolytic viruses, particularly NDV, in cancer treatment.

Publisher’s note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Nahid Babaei and Hadi Esmaeili Gouvarchin Ghaleh equally contributed to this study.

Author contributions

ARK, NB, HEGG, AD, MF: developed the theoretical formalism, performed the analytic calculations and performed the numerical simulations. authors contributed to the final version of the manuscript. NB: supervised the project.

Funding

The authors declare that no funds, grants, or other support was received during the preparation of this manuscript.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.
