---
pmid: '39449013'
doi: 10.1186/s12967-024-05762-y
pmcid: PMC11515615
title: Blautia coccoides and its metabolic products enhance the efficacy of bladder
  cancer immunotherapy by promoting CD8+ T cell infiltration.
authors:
- Wang Benlin
- Shangguan Wentai
- Li Weijia
- Xie Ming
- Yu Yao
- Yang Qishen
- Sun Qi
- Xue Jingwen
- Zhu Zhangrui
- Zhu Yuexuan
- Wu Peng
journal: Journal of translational medicine
year: 2024
month: 10
volume: '22'
issue: '1'
pages: '964'
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1186/s12967-024-05762-y.pdf
cited_by_count: 20
mesh_terms:
- Urinary Bladder Neoplasms
- Animals
- Immunotherapy
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes
- Humans
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome
- Mice, Inbred C57BL
- Female
- Mice
- Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Treatment Outcome
- Probiotics
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types:
- bladder
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes:
- PD-1
- beta-catenin
drugs:
- trigonelline
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Tannin, Tannase and Anticancer Activities
diseases_annotated:
- bladder cancer
- cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 14
icite_rcr: 2.0435477695509303
icite_percentile: 75.1
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
biology_processes:
- tme-stroma
resistant_states: []
pathway_targets: []
---

# Blautia coccoides and its metabolic products enhance the efficacy of bladder cancer immunotherapy by promoting CD8+ T cell infiltration.

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND**: Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) have emerged as a novel and effective treatment strategy, yet their effectiveness is limited to a subset of patients. The gut microbiota, recognized as a promising anticancer adjuvant, is being increasingly suggested to augment the efficacy of ICIs. Despite this, the causal link between the gut microbiota and the success of immunotherapy is not well understood. This gap in knowledge has driven us to identify beneficial microbiota and explore the underlying molecular mechanisms.

**METHODS**: Through 16S rDNA sequencing, we identified distinct gut microbiota in patients undergoing treatment with ICIs. Following this, we assessed the impact of probiotics on anti-PD-1 therapy in bladder cancer using mouse models, employing a multi-omics strategy. Subsequently, we uncovered the mechanisms through which Blautia-produced metabolites enhance antitumor immunity, utilizing untargeted metabolomics and a range of molecular biology techniques.

**RESULTS**: In our research, the LEfSe analysis revealed a significant enrichment of the Blautia genus in the gut microbiota of patients who responded to immunotherapy. We discovered that the external addition of Blautia coccoides hampers tumor growth in a bladder cancer mouse model by enhancing the infiltration of CD8+ T cells within the tumor microenvironment (TME). Further investigations through untargeted metabolomics and molecular biology experiments showed that oral administration of Blautia coccoides elevated trigonelline levels. This, in turn, suppresses the β-catenin expression both in vitro and in vivo, thereby augmenting the cancer-killing activity of CD8+ T cells.

**CONCLUSIONS**: This research provided valuable insights into enhancing the efficacy of PD-1 inhibitors in clinical settings. It was suggested that applying Blautia coccoides and its metabolic product, trigonelline, could serve as a synergistic treatment method with PD-1 inhibitors in clinical applications.

## Full Text

Blautia coccoides and its metabolic products enhance the efficacy of bladder cancer immunotherapy by promoting CD8+ T cell infiltration

Background

Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) have emerged as a novel and effective treatment strategy, yet their effectiveness is limited to a subset of patients. The gut microbiota, recognized as a promising anticancer adjuvant, is being increasingly suggested to augment the efficacy of ICIs. Despite this, the causal link between the gut microbiota and the success of immunotherapy is not well understood. This gap in knowledge has driven us to identify beneficial microbiota and explore the underlying molecular mechanisms.

Methods

Through 16S rDNA sequencing, we identified distinct gut microbiota in patients undergoing treatment with ICIs. Following this, we assessed the impact of probiotics on anti-PD-1 therapy in bladder cancer using mouse models, employing a multi-omics strategy. Subsequently, we uncovered the mechanisms through which Blautia-produced metabolites enhance antitumor immunity, utilizing untargeted metabolomics and a range of molecular biology techniques.

Results

In our research, the LEfSe analysis revealed a significant enrichment of the Blautia genus in the gut microbiota of patients who responded to immunotherapy. We discovered that the external addition of Blautia coccoides hampers tumor growth in a bladder cancer mouse model by enhancing the infiltration of CD8+ T cells within the tumor microenvironment (TME). Further investigations through untargeted metabolomics and molecular biology experiments showed that oral administration of Blautia coccoides elevated trigonelline levels. This, in turn, suppresses the β-catenin expression both in vitro and in vivo, thereby augmenting the cancer-killing activity of CD8+ T cells.

Conclusions

This research provided valuable insights into enhancing the efficacy of PD-1 inhibitors in clinical settings. It was suggested that applying Blautia coccoides and its metabolic product, trigonelline, could serve as a synergistic treatment method with PD-1 inhibitors in clinical applications.

Graphical Abstract

Supplementary Information

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12967-024-05762-y.

Background

Bladder cancer (BCa) is the 10th most common malignancy worldwide, which accounts for 3% of global cancer diagnoses. According to GLOBOCAN, there were 573,000 new BCa cases and 213,000 new BCa-related deaths worldwide in 2020. Even though surgery or chemotherapy has been able to achieve therapeutic effects, the evolution of tumors often persists, negatively impacting the quality of life and survival rates of patients. ICIs emerged as one of the most promising immunotherapeutic approaches, extensively applied across various cancers, including melanoma, lung cancer, and bladder cancer. ICIs function by blocking proteins that inhibit the immune system's ability to destroy cancer cells, thereby releasing the inhibitory brakes on T-cells. This results in robust activation of the immune system and a productive antitumor immune response, enhancing the body's natural ability to fight cancer. Up to that point, the FDA had approved six ICIs targeting programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1)/programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) for treating locally advanced and metastatic BCa, marking a significant advancement. Nevertheless, the response rate to immunotherapy in BCa patients remained at only approximately 25%.

The gut microbiota, hosting approximately 3 × 1013 bacteria in a symbiotic relationship with their host, plays a crucial role in human health and disease conditions. Recent advancements in next-generation and high-throughput sequencing technologies revealed several gut microbiota that contributed to the maintenance of host health. Some studies have shown that the gut microbiota played a beneficial role in the response to cancer immunotherapy across various cancer types. For instance, gut microbiota Lactobacillus gallinarum has been found to enhance the efficacy of immunotherapy efficacy in colorectal cancer models by inhibiting regulatory T cells. Similarly, in the NSCLC model, the gut microbiota and its metabolites improve the efficacy of immunotherapy by enhancing PD-1 expression through increased acetylation modifications. Beyond the well-recognized probiotics, the Blautia genus also started to gain attention as a potential probiotic. Blautia coccoides, a gram-positive anaerobic bacterium, was initially isolated from the feces of mice on a high-lactose diet and found to be widely distributed in the feces and intestines of mammals. As a member of the Lachnospiraceae family, Bl. coccoides has garnered widespread attention for its beneficial effects on metabolic diseases. It has been reported to alleviate metabolic disorders by metabolizing tryptophan into indole-3-acetic acid. Despite the growing body of evidence suggesting that gut microbiota can influence tumor responses to ICIs, research specifically exploring the connection between Bl. coccoides and BC immunotherapy have been limited.

Hence our research reveals how Bl. coccoides acts as a potential biological adjuvant, boosting the effectiveness of PD-1 inhibitors and enhancing the functionality of CD8+ T cells within the TME. This highlights the possibility of targeting Bl. coccoides to enhance immune responses and improve the effectiveness of ICIs in bladder cancer models.

Methods

Patient cohort and characteristics

From July 2022 to November 2022, we collected patients who were receiving ICIs treatment as their first-line or second-line systemic treatment from Nanfang Hospital. The inclusion criteria are: (1) Pathological types confirmed by professional pathologists; (2) Treatment with PD-1 inhibitors for ≥ 3 courses; (3) Malignant tumor lesions that can be evaluated by imaging; (4) Patients who have previously received first-line treatment but whose disease continues to progress; (5) Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status (ECOG PS) ≤ 2.The exclusion criteria are: (1) Use of antibiotics within 1 month prior to the collection of fecal samples; (2) Patients with autoimmune diseases or inflammatory bowel disease; (3) History of other tumors. Treatment responses were classified according to the RECIST, v 1.1. We assessed the objective response in target lesions and classified patients as responders, which included those experiencing complete response (CR), partial response (PR), or stable disease (SD), and non-responders, which included those experiencing progressive disease (PD). Prior to the commencement of the study, approval was obtained from the Nangfang Institutional Research Ethics Committee (NFEC-202005-K7) and all participants provided their consent by signing an informed consent form.

Cell culture

Cell lines were acquired from Xinyuan technology Co., Ltd., located in Guangzhou, China. The murine bladder cancer cell MB49 was maintained in DMEM high glucose medium (Gibco) with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Gibco) and 100 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin(China), at 37 ℃ and 5% CO2 in a humidified environment. Human bladder cancer cells lines T24, BIU-87 and 5637 were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco), supplemented with 10% FBS and 100 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin. These cells were subsequently expanded for use in vivo experiments.

Bacterial culture

Blautia coccoides (BNCC361193) were purchased from Guangzhou Zuoke Biotechnology Development Co., Ltd. It was cultured for 4–5 days in a modified chopped meat broth (MMB, containing finely chopped beef extract supplemented with peptone, yeast extract, L-cysteine hydrochloride, hemin, vitamins K, K2HPO4, and resazurin) at 37 °C under an anaerobic environment (0% O2, 10% CO2, 10% H2, and 80% N2). The MMB created an anaerobic environment, provided rich nutrients for anaerobic bacteria, and promoted their metabolic activities to support growth and reproduction. Bacterial cultures exhibiting good growth conditions, corresponding to the log phase with an OD600 of approximately 1, were collected for subsequent gavage treatment.

Animals and experimental design

Female C57BL/6 mice, aged 6–8 weeks and weighing 18.2 ± 2.1 g, were acquired from SPF Biotechnology Co., Ltd in Beijing, China, and maintained under specific pathogen-free (SPF) conditions, the animals were kept at a temperature of 24 ± 1 °C with 50 ± 10% relative humidity and a 12-h light/dark cycle. They had unrestricted access to chow and water. To reduce selection bias, animals were randomly assigned to experimental and control groups. All handling was performed by the same group of trained personnel following standardized protocols to minimize experimental error.

To establish the bladder tumor model, MB49 cells at a concentration of 2–3 × 106 cells/mouse were resuspended in 200 μL of DMEM without FBS. This suspension was then injected subcutaneously into the right flank of each mouse to form a skin bulge. Upon tumors reaching volume of 100mm3, mice were randomly divided into four treatment groups (n = 6): the control group receiving no treatment; the anti-PD-1 group treated with 200 µg/mouse of anti-PD-1 mAb (BioXcell, BE0146) four times at three-day intervals; the BL group given 1 × 109 CFU live bacteria/mouse; and B + P group receiving a combination of anti-PD-1 mAb and live bacteria. Tumor size was measured triweekly, calculating volume as length × width2 × 0.52. In the metabolite validation experiment, mice were split into four treatment groups (n = 6): the control group receiving no treatment; the anti-PD-1 group treated with 200 µg/mouse of anti-PD-1 mAb four times at three-day intervals; the Tri group receiving 50 mg/kg trigonelline/mouse; and T + P group receiving a combination of anti-PD-1 mAb and trigonelline.

All animal experiments were performed in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Southern Medical University (IACUC-LAC-20221023-004).

Quantitative real-time PCR

Total RNA from tumor and serum samples was isolated using the Animal Total RNA Isolation Kit (Foregene Co., Ltd, Chengdu, China), with concentration determined by NanoDrop (BioTeke, Beijing, China). The cDNA was synthesized from RNA via HiScript III RT SuperMix for qPCR (Vazyme Biotech Co., Ltd, Nanjing, China), adhering to the manufacturer's guidelines. The gene expression levels of proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α) was quantified using ChamQ SYBR qPCR Master Mix (Vazyme, Nanjing, China) on a QuantStudio5 instrument (Applied biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific,USA), employing the 2−ΔΔCt method, utilizing β-actin mRNA expression as reference and the NC group as baseline. The primary sequences used for qPCR are listed in Supplement Table 1.

Fecal DNA extraction and 16S rDNA analysis

Fecal samples from humans were placed on ice and stored at − 80 °C for later analysis. Bacterial DNA was PCR amplified with barcoded universal bacterial primers targeting variable region V3-V4 of 16S rDNA gene (341F, 5′-CCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG-3′, 806R, 5′-GGACTACHVGGGTATCTAAT-3′). We used the Greengenes database for taxonomic analysis. The data processing steps involved converting raw reads obtained from sequencing into clean tags. This was done by filtering low-quality reads, assembling the sequences, and merging paired-end reads into tags. These tags were further filtered to produce clean tags. The clean tags were then clustered, and chimeric tags detected during clustering were removed, resulting in effective tags. After obtaining OTUs, we conducted OTU abundance statistics based on the effective tags. We assessed alpha diversity using the Chao1, Shannon, and Simpson indices. Beta diversity was analyzed using Principal Coordinate Analysis (PCoA) based on the unweighted UniFrac distance. The diversity indices were calculated using the QIIME2 diversity plugin, and statistical significance between different groups was evaluated using PERMANOVA. Differential abundance analysis was performed using the LEfSe method to identify significantly different OTUs between groups. We set the significance threshold to an LDA score > 2.0 and a p < 0.05. Analysis of the 16S rDNA mirobiome sequencing data was performed using the free online platform of Omicsmart (http://www.omicsmart.com). Gene Denovo Biotechnology Co., Ltd in Guangzhou, China, conducted the analysis.

Flow cytometry assay

Single cell suspensions were prepared from tumor and spleen following published protocols. Spleen and tumor tissues were mechanically dissected, then digested in RPMI 1640 with 1 mg/mL DNase I and 5 mg/mL type IV collagenase for 45 min at 37 °C. Digested tissues were filtered through a 70 µm cell strainer. Spleen tissues underwent additional RBC lysis and filtration. Antibodies used included: CD45 (APC/Cy7, Biolegend, 103115), CD3 (PC/Cy5.5, Biolegend, 100217), CD4 (FITC, Biolegend, 100509), CD8a (APC, Biolegend, 100711), IFNγ (PE/Cy7, Biolegend, 505,825), GranzymeB (BV421, Biolegend, 515409), with surface staining conducted according to standard protocols. For intracellular staining, cells were activated with 2µL Leukocyte Activation Cocktail and BD GolgiPlug™ (BD, Bioscience), incubated at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for 5 h, then fixed and permeabilized using BD Cytofix/Cytoperm™ Fixation/Permeabilization Solution Kit (Biolegend),in line with the manufacture’s instructions. Data were acquired on a FACS Verse Flow cytometer (BD Bioscience), and analysis with FlowJo v10.

Immunohistochemistry

Fresh tumor tissues were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 48 h, embedded in paraffin, and sectioned into 4 µm slices. Following dewaxing and rehydration, antigen retrieval was performed using sodium citrate/EDTA, and blocking. Sections were incubated overnight at 4 °C with antibodies against PD-L1 (Proteintech, 66248-1-Ig, 1:5000), ki67 (Proteintech, 27309-1-AP,1:2000), anti-CD8α (Abcam, Ab217344,1:1000) and β-catenin (Proteintech, 51067-2-AP,1:5000). And then with HRP-labeled the next day, developed with DAB, and counterstained with hematoxylin. The images were acquired with a microscope and analyzed using Image J software.

Immunofluorescence

Tumor slides were deparaffinized in xylene, dehydrated through ethanol gradients, and treated with 3% H2O2 for 10 minutes to block endogenous peroxidase. After blocking with goat serum for 1 hour at room temperature, slides were incubated overnight at 4°C with antibodies against PD-L1 (Proteintech, 66248-1-Ig,1:200), ki67 (Proteintech, 27309-1-AP,1:200), and β-catenin (Proteintech, 51067-2-AP,1:500). Secondary antibodies were applied for 1 hour at room temperature the next day, followed by multicolor immunofluorescence detection with a fluorescence microscope.

Untargeted metabolomics analysis

Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC–MS) was used for untargeted metabolomic profiling using the UHPLC system provided by Agilent Technologies (Santa Clara, CA, USA), analyzed by Gene Denovo Biotechnology Co. (Guangzhou, China). Data underwent preprocessing, annotation, and multivariate statistical analysis including OPLS-DA using the ropls R package, to compare groups. Metabolites were ranked by Variable Importance in Projection (VIP) scores with those having VIP ≥ 1, p < 0.05, and an absolute fold change (FC) of ≥ 2 identified as differential. The results were further analyzed for KEGG pathway enrichment using the KEGG database (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/). 

Measurement of serum trigonelline

The serum samples (100 μL), ddH2O (300 µL), and HLPC-grade methanol (99.9% purity, 1500 µL) were vortexed, mixed overnight at – 80 ℃, and then centrifuged at 18,626 × g-force for 15 min at 4 ℃. Post-centrifugation supernatants were derivatized for trigonelline detection, measured via high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Trigonelline quantification was based on the chromatogram area ratio compared to an internal standard, analyzed with Xcalibur software.

Isolation and culture of CD8+T cells from peripheral blood

The blood from healthy volunteers, collected using EDTA tubes, was used to isolate peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) using Lymphoprep (Stemcell) via density gradient. The blood samples were layered over Lymphoprep and centrifuged at 600 × g-force for 30 min at room temperature with the brake off. This allowed for the effective separation of PBMCs. CD8+T cells were purified with EasySep™ Human CD8+T Cell Iso Kit (Stemcell) and purity confirmed by flow cytometry. These cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 with 25 µL/mL Immunoculture Human T cell Activator CD3/CD28 (Stemcell) medium, 10% fetal bovine serum, 50 ng/mL human IL-2, and 100 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin, for 72 h at 37 ℃ and 5% CO2 in a humidified environment.

Cell proliferation assay

T24, BIU-87, and 5637 cells were seeded into 12-well plates at a cell-dependent concentration. After 24 h, activated CD8 + T cells were co-cultured with the adherent tumor cells at a ratio of 10:1 for 24 h. Following the co-culture, trigonelline (0, 50, 100, 200 µM) was added and incubated for an additional 24 h. The old medium was then removed, and the cells were washed with pre-cooled PBS to eliminate the CD8+ T cells. The adherent tumor cells were subsequently digested, with cell morphology observed under the microscope and cell counts confirmed. Following confirmation, the tumor cells were seeded into 96-well plates at a density of 5,000 cells per well for 48 h. Post-treatment, the CCK-8 reagent was added according to the manufacturer's instructions, and absorbance was measured at 450 nm.

Wound healing assay

To assess the impact of trigonelline on bladder cancer cell migration, cells were seeded in 24-well plates at a density of 50,000 cells in 500 µL medium. At 90% confluence, straight scratches were made across the cell layer. The cells were then gently washed twice with PBS and treated with CD8+T cells (5 × 105) and various concentrations of trigonelline (0, 50, 100, 200 µM). Gap closure was observed and documented with images taken at 0 and 48 h using a light microscope.

Flow cytometry assay for cell apoptosis

The Annexin V-FITC/PI double staining kit (Beytion, Shanghai,China) was used for apoptosis assessment as instructions. Briefly, 5 × 105 cells were collected and washed twice with precooled PBS (4 ℃/on ice). They were then resuspended in 1 × binding buffer at a concentration of 1 × 106 cells/ml. 5 μL of Annexin V-FITC and 5 μL of PI were added to 100 μL of the cell suspension. The mixture was gently vortexed and incubated for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. After incubation, 400 μL of 1 × binding buffer was added to each tube. The samples were then analyzed by flow cytometry within 1 h.

Statistical analysis

Statistical analysis was performed with GraphPad Prism 8.0, presenting variables as Means ± SEM. One-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s tests was used for multiple group comparisons. The Mann–Whitney U-test analyzed non-parametric data, with significance at p < 0.05. Significance levels were marked as *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, ns indicates no significant difference.

Results

The clinical characteristics of the study cohort and the effects of immunotherapy on their fecal microbiota

Based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria, 58 patients undergoing anti-PD-1 therapy at Nanfang Hospital were selected for our study between July 2022 and November 2022. However, fecal samples were not obtained from 8 patients, resulting in a total of 50 fecal samples being collected, as outlined in the study design. (Fig. 1A). Based on the RECIST 1.1 criteria, 50 patients with an evaluable response were identified as responders (n = 39) and non-responders (n = 11). Considering various factors such as gender, age, BMI, tumor type, size, clinical stage and treatment regimen, which could influence disease progression and gut microbiota changes in cancer patients, we meticulously collected and compared baseline data to mitigate these factors' impact on the study outcomes. The comparison revealed no significant differences in clinical baseline variables between the two groups, thereby minimizing confounding variables' influence on the experimental group differentiation. The patients' detailed baseline characteristics are listed in Table 1.

Initially, we investigated the relationship between treatment response and gut microbiota composition using OUT-based unweighted UniFrac distance PCoA analysis. This analysis revealed significant differences in the gut microbiota composition between the two groups (p = 0.04) (Fig. 1B). Despite this, no significant differences were observed in fecal microbial α diversity, as demonstrated by the Chao1 index (p = 0.29), Shannon index (p = 0.85) and Simpson index (p = 0.49) indices (Figure S1A). At the phylum level, an increase in the relative abundance of Firmicutes, Proteobacteria and Bacteroidota, along with a decrease in Actinobacteria, was noted in the R group compared to the NR group (Fig. 1C). However, the presence of these four phyla level did not show significant statistical differences (Figure S1B). At the genus level, increases in the relative abundance of Bacteroides, Blautia, Ruminococcus torques and Faecalibacterium were observed in the R group, whereas Streptococcus, and Lactobacillus significantly decreased (Fig. 1C). The Blautia and Ruminococcus genera were notably enriched in the R group, showing statistical significance (p = 0.02, p = 0.04; Figure S1C). LEfSe analysis results identified Lachnospirales, Lachnospiraceae and Blautia genus as predominantly present in the R group, while Methanobrevibacter and Lactobacillus_mucosae were more common in the NR group (Fig. 1D). The evolutionary phylogenetic tree diagram and Circus analysis provided an intuitive representation of the dominant genus composition ratio among different samples, indirectly confirming the community map analysis results (Figure S1D and F).

To determine which gut microbiota species could be potential probiotics, we delved deeper into the 16S rDNA sequencing results. A species with a higher Gini index is deemed more effective in differentiating between two groups (Figure S1E). The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve assesses the sensitivity and accuracy of a specie ability to differentiate, evaluating the validity of species as biomarkers (Fig. 1E). Based on the Gini index and the ROC curve results (AUC = 0.737), we consistently identified Blautia as a potential probiotic. Meanwhile it was important to consider the limitations of using ROC curves and the Gini index for evaluating biomarkers. ROC curves could be misleading with imbalanced data and did not account for the costs of false positives and negatives. The Gini index, though useful for ranking feature importance, did not capture interactions between features and can be sensitive to small sample sizes, increasing the risk of overfitting. Therefore, these methods should be used alongside other approaches for robust identification of differential bacteria. Consequently, we documented the abundance of the Blautia genus in each fecal sample and created a box plot, showcasing its notable role in distinguishing between different response outcomes (p = 0.02). The results show that the average abundance in the R group is 2.45 times that in the NR group, with a 145.21% higher abundance in the R group compared to the NR group. (Fig. 1F). Collectively, these findings indicate a strong correlation between high Blautia abundance and enhanced immunotherapy efficacy in patients.

Blautia coccoides enhanced the efficacy of PD-1 inhibitors by promoting CD8+T cell infiltration in the tumor microenvironment

Blautia coccoides, a key species within Blautia genus, has been identified for its ability to convert ceramides into fatty acids. These fatty acids, once absorbed by the intestine, elicit beneficial effects.To assess the impact of Bl. coccoides on enhancing the antitumor response alongside anti-PD-1 treatment in vivo, we established animal models according to the experimental protocol (Fig. 2A) and tracked tumor growth in mice from different treatment groups using bioluminescence technology (Figs. 2B). By the 17th day, the experimental mice were euthanized to collect tumor tissues for weight and volume assessments. The effectiveness of the tumor growth inhibition and anti-tumor response was preliminarily evaluated through the analysis of tumor volume growth curves and tumor weights (Fig. 2C). Comparatively, the anti-PD-1 treatment group exhibited a significant decrease in tumor volume (p = 0.0003) compared to the NC group. While there was a decrease in tumor weight in the anti-PD-1 treatment group, the difference was not statistically significant (p = 0.08). The BL group's final tumor volume was marginally lower than that of the NC group (p = 0.18) but exceeded that observed in the anti-PD-1 treatment group (p = 0.04), with the tumor weight showing no significant statistical difference when compared to either the NC (p = 0.99) or the anti-PD-1(p = 0.06) groups. Remarkably, the B + P group saw tumor volume shrink to a quarter of that with only PD-1 treatment and tumor weight halved compared to anti-PD-1 groups (Fig. 2C). These findings suggest that while Bl. coccoides supplementation serves as a beneficial bacterial treatment to amplify the antitumor effects of PD-1 inhibitors, its solitary application falls short of significantly curtailing tumor growth.

As the cornerstone of immunotherapeutic effectiveness, cytotoxic CD8+ T cells play a pivotal role by recognizing and annihilating tumor cells through the release of IFN-γ and Granzyme B, which trigger apoptosis and bolster the efficacy of tumor treatments. Flow cytometry was employed to measure the presence of CD8+ T cells, IFN-γ and Granzyme B in the tumor tissues and spleens of mice from various treatment groups. This evaluation revealed that co-administration of Bl. coccoides and anti-PD-1 antibodies, significantly increased the infiltration of CD8+T cells, IFN-γ and Granzyme B within both tumor and spleen tissues. Additionally, immunohistochemical staining demonstrated a relatively increased expression of CD8+ T cells in the B + P group, which was consistent with the flow cytometry results (Fig. 2D–H). The concordance between the two methods reinforces the robustness of these findings. These results suggest that Bl. coccoides could potentially boost the accumulation and killing efficiency of CD8+ T cells, enhancing the efficacy of immunotherapy as a whole.

Subsequently, the expression levels of inflammatory cytokines and other markers, including Ki67 and PD-L1, were evaluated within the TME. In the B + P group, a significant reduction was observed in the tumor tissue levels of proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β (p < 0.01) and TNF-α (p = 0.02), however IL-6 was not significantly reduced (p = 0.49) (Figure S2A). Ki67, a nuclear antigen indicative of active cell proliferation within both normal and cancerous cells, is recognized as a critical clinical biomarker for tumor classification, prognosis, and predicting responses to therapy, thereby playing a pivotal role in assessing cancer treatment efficacy. PD-L1, an essential immune checkpoint ligand found on tumor cell surfaces, facilitates bladder cancer cell evasion from the cytotoxic effects of CD8+ T cells in the TME due to its increased expression. Immunohistochemistry analysis across different treatment groups revealed that the combined treatment of Bl. coccoides and anti-PD-1 inhibitors not only reduced tumor size but also significantly lowered the positive rates of Ki-67 (p = 0.003) and PD-L1 (p < 0.001) expression compared to the anti-PD-1 group alone(Figure S3A). This reduction suggests an inhibition of tumor cell proliferation. Further validation of Ki67 and PD-L1 expression in tumor tissues was performed through tissue immunofluorescence staining experiments, assessing the combination therapy's impact. The findings demonstrated that, relative to the anti-PD-1 group, the B + P group exhibited decreased fluorescence expression of Ki67 (p = 0.002) and PD-L1 (p < 0.001), aligning with the immunohistochemistry observations (Figures S3B-C and S2 B-C). Together, these results indicate that Bl. coccoides exerts an antitumor effect in a bladder cancer model. When combined with PD-1 inhibitor, it facilitates CD8+T cell infiltration and synergistically enhances the anti-tumor immunity elicited by anti-PD-1 therapy.

Blautia coccoides improved immunotherapy effectiveness through its metabolite trigonelline

Recent research primarily indicates that the beneficial effects of gut microbiota are due to the metabolites they produce, rather than the presence of dead bacterial. In order to determine if Bl. coccoides functions similarly, we exposed Bl. coccoides bacterial suspension to heat, rendering it inactive and then administered it to mice through gavage. Our findings revealed that mice treated with heat-killed Bl. coccoides did not show improved responses to PD-1 inhibitor therapy (Figure S4 A-C). Therefore, we hypothesized that the improvement in immunotherapy effectiveness might result from the movement of metabolites that were produced by Bl. coccoides.

To explore this hypothesis, we conducted an untargeted fecal metabolomic analysis along with a qualitative metabolomic comparison of samples from NC and BL mice groups (n = 10). The analysis identified 15,254 peaks in the positive ionization (POS) mode, which included 3248 metabolites and 10,889 peaks in the negative ionization (NEG) mode, with 2125 metabolites. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Orthogonal Partial Least Squares Discriminant Analysis (OPLS-DA) were utilized to discern the metabolic differences in fecal samples between the NC and BL groups. The results clearly differentiated the two groups in both ionization modes (Figure S5A and S6A).

We utilized a volcano plot to visually represent the differences in metabolite content between the two groups. In the plot, each point represents a metabolite, with the x-axis displaying the log2 fold change between the groups and the y-axis representing the − log10 p-value from the statistical tests. Metabolites with a VIP score ≥ 1, p-value < 0.05, and a fold change ≥ 2 were highlighted to indicate significant differences between the two groups. In the positive ionization mode, we observed that 47 metabolites were increased, while 82 were decreased in the BL group. Conversely, in the negative ionization mode, 37 metabolites were found to be elevated and 29 were reduced (Figure S5B and S6B). Among the metabolites listed in Supplement Table 2 and Supplement Table 3, we conducted a comprehensive analysis of the correlation between all differential metabolites pairwise using the Pearson correlation coefficient. This analysis was performed to explore the relationships and potential interactions between various metabolites. Supplement Table 2 presented the metabolites that showed statistically significant differences in abundance under the positive ion mode. Each row represented a different metabolite, and the columns provided detailed information including the metabolite name, m/z ratio, fold change, formula and p-value indicating the level of statistical significance. Supplement Table 3 represented the same type of information but for metabolites detected in the negative ion mode. The structure and content of this table were the same as those described for Supplement Table 2. Metabolite correlation often reveals the synergy of changes between metabolites: if the trend of changes is similar to a certain type of metabolite, it is positively correlated and shown in blue; if the trend of changes is opposite, it is negatively correlated and shown in red. The results indicate a high correlation among differential metabolites, suggesting that they may influence biological functions through mutual regulation (Figure S7 A-B). Bioinformatic analysis revealed that metabolic pathway was the most significant changed pathway between the two groups. Pathway enrichment analysis indicated that both metabolic pathway and Biosynthesis of secondary metabolites were changed obviously (Figure S5E and S6E).

In an effort to identify beneficial natural metabolites elevated in the BL group, we integrated ROC curves and insights from prior research. This approach revealed a significant upregulation of trigonelline in the BL group, demonstrated by an AUC of 0.88 on the ROC curve, suggesting it has substantial predictive capability. Trigonelline, an alkaloid depicted in Fig. 5A, is recognized for its diverse pharmacological benefits, including anti-apoptotic, anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and neuroprotective effects, and it holds promise for enhancing cognitive functions. Nonetheless, it's important to note that the untargeted mass spectrometry analysis provided only qualitative insights. We planned to extend our investigation by quantitatively analyzing trigonelline levels in mouse serum samples from both the anti-PD-1 and the B + P groups using LC–MS. This quantitative analysis aims to ascertain more precise changes in trigonelline concentrations within the serum. In our analytical images, the principal peak for each sample indicates the presence of the target compound, trigonelline. The distance between peaks represents the relative quantity of compounds detected at specific retention times, and the peak size denotes the abundance of the compound. Specifically, the trigonelline concentration in the anti-PD-1 treatment group was measured at 6.25 ± 0.50 ng/mL, while in the B + P combination treatment group, the concentration significantly increased to 17.19 ± 6.00 ng/mL (p = 0.01) (Fig. 3A). The quantitative detection of trigonelline indicated an upregulation in the B + P group, highlighting its potential as a distinctive metabolite to differentiate between the treatment effects of these groups.

The microbial metabolite trigonelline enhanced the efficacy of anti-PD-1 immunotherapy by boosting CD8+T cell antitumor immunity

In order to verify if trigonelline, a compound produced by the gut microbiota, has the capacity to enhance the antitumor immunity in bladder cancer models, we utilized MB49 mouse models. These animal models were subjected to various treatments according to the experimental protocol (Fig. 3B). Analysis of the outcomes revealed that while trigonelline alone could suppress the tumor volume or hinder the progression in mice, the combination of T + P group exhibited a more pronounced therapeutic effect, with a significant difference observed (p = 0.02) (Fig. 3C). Furthermore, the data obtained from flow cytometry assays underscored that the combined treatment T + P group was effective in elevating the ratio of CD8+ T cells within the TME, in comparison to the group treated with anti-PD-1 mAb alone (p = 0.03) (Fig. 3D). Concurrently, an increase in the levels of IFN-γ and Granzyme B in CD8+ T cells extracted from tumor tissues was noted in the group receiving both treatments, as opposed to the group that received only the anti-PD-1 mAb (p = 0.01 and p = 0.02, respectively) (Fig. 3F). In addition, immunohistochemical staining demonstrated a relatively increased expression of CD8+ T cells in the T + P group (Fig. 3E), further corroborating the enhanced infiltration of these cells as observed through flow cytometry. These results suggested that trigonelline demonstrated a therapeutic effect similar to that of Bl. coccoides.

Current research underscores the pivotal role of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway in the intricate processes of differentiation, proliferation, and invasion of tumor cells. Within this pathway, β-catenin emerges as a critical protein, exerting a profound influence on the advancement of bladder cancer. In light of these insights, our study embarked on an investigation into how trigonelline treatment impacts β-catenin protein expression within tumor tissues. Utilizing immunohistochemical analysis, we meticulously evaluated the expression levels of target proteins across various treatment cohorts. Our findings revealed that the combination treatment T + P group exhibited a marked suppression in β-catenin protein expression. This suppression was significantly more pronounced when compared to the group treated solely with the anti-PD-1 inhibitor (p = 0.0005). Interestingly, the comparison between the anti-PD-1 group and the Tri group did not yield a statistically significant difference in β-catenin expression (p = 0.12) (Fig. 4A and C). In a bid to further validate these findings, we arrived at similar conclusions through immunofluorescence (Fig. 4B and D). Meanwhile, we measured the levels of β-catenin in the tissues using qPCR and found that the β-catenin levels in the combination treatment T + P group were significantly reduced compared to the anti-PD-1 group (p = 0.04) (Figs. 4E). As mentioned above, our data propose a compelling narrative: trigonelline, derived from the gut microbiota, potentially enhances the infiltration of CD8+ T cells into the TME. This occurs through the inhibition of the β-catenin protein expression, culminating in the suppression of tumor tissue proliferation and offering a promising avenue for therapeutic intervention in bladder cancer.

The co-culture of trigonelline with CD8+T cells suppressed β-catenin expression and inhibited bladder cancer cell growth

To evaluate the potential anticancer effects of trigonelline on the progression of bladder cancer, this study implemented an in vitro experimental setup involving three distinct bladder cancer cells(T24,BIU-87 and 5637 cells),alongside CD8+T cells and various concentration of trigonelline. We assessed the extraction efficiency of CD8+ T cells through flow cytometry. As shown in Figure S8, the proportion of CD8+ T cells was evaluated before (Figure S8A) and after (Figure S8B) the application of the CD8+ T cell selection kit. The results demonstrate that the selection kit significantly enhances the proportion of CD8+ T cells, indicating a high extraction efficiency suitable for subsequent experiments. Evaluating the tumor cell viability after co-cultivation with CD8+T cells and trigonelline ranging from 0 μM to 200 μM. The CCK-8 assay results indicated a nuanced response to trigonelline across the different cell lines. Specifically, in T24 cells, compared to the NC group, there was a statistical difference only at 0 µM concentration (p = 0.03). In the case of BIU-87 cells, there was no statistical difference between the treatment groups (p > 0.05, ns). Conversely, in 5637 cells, a notable decrease in optical density (OD) was recorded post-treatment with varying concentrations of trigonelline, showcasing a statistically significant reduction in cell viability at concentration of 50 µM (p < 0.01),100 µM (p < 0.01), and 200 µM (p = 0.02) when compared to the NC group (Fig. 5B). Furthermore, the wound healing assay was conducted to examine the effects of trigonelline on tumor cell migration. The results highlighted that in T24 cells, trigonelline treatment at concentrations exceeding 50 μM significantly impeded the migration rate, with statistical significance (Fig. 5C). For BIU-87 cells, a notable reduction in migration rate was observed exclusively at the 50 μM concentration, presenting a statistical difference (p = 0.0002), while no significant differences were found among other concentration groups (Fig. 5D). However, compared to the above two cell types, in 5637 cells, the migration in the NC group was more significant, and the effects were best at concentrations of 100 μM and 200 μM (p < 0.001) (Fig. 5E).

The process of co-culturing trigonelline with CD8+ T cells demonstrate a potent capability to suppress the proliferation and migration of tumor cells, showcasing a pronounced impact particularly on 5637 cells. To substantiate our hypothesis, this investigation proceeded to assess the apoptosis response of 5637 cells after co-culture using Annexin V/PI double staining flow cytometry. The results revealed that the rate of apoptosis in 5637 cells incrementally escalated with higher concentrations of trigonelline. This pattern underscores the potential of trigonelline to facilitate tumor cell apoptosis, notably through the augmentation of CD8+ T cell activity (Fig. 6A). Furthering our exploration, this study also delved into the impact of trigonelline treatment on β-catenin expression within tumor cells. Through conducting immunofluorescence staining experiments on the co-cultured tumor cells, it was observed that, in comparison to the group treated with 0 μM concentration of trigonelline, elevated concentrations manifested a significant suppressive effect on the β-catenin protein expression (Fig. 6B). These observations lead to the conclusion that T cells, by themselves, do not diminish β-catenin expression in tumor cells. Instead, it is the intervention with trigonelline that plays a crucial role.

Discussion

Gut microbiota symbiosis plays a multifaceted role in shaping the immune responses of the human host. It influences various components of the systemic immune system, including macrophages, B cells and CD8+ T cells. CD8+T cells can be activated by the intestinal microbiota and its metabolites, such as cytotoxic T lymphocytes, and interact with other immune cells, especially in the TME. Immunotherapy targeting the close interaction between CD8+T cells and the gut microbiota shows great promise. Besides, the significance of the gut microbiota as a key factor in influencing the efficacy of ICIs is widely recognized. The mechanisms through which gut microbiota enhance immune-stimulatory effects primarily include promoting both local and systemic T cell-mediated immunity against tumors. For instance, the presence of certain bacterial families, such as Lachnospiraceae, Ruminococcaceae, and Akkermansiaceae, has been linked to increased T cell recruitment to tumors, with greater activation and improved effector functions. Additionally, gut microbiota can enhance immune responses by reducing the regulatory functions of Tregs and other immune-suppressive cells, ultimately leading to a stronger overall immune response to therapy. Particularly in the context of melanoma patients undergoing anti-PD-1-based immunotherapy, it has been observed that the gut microbiota composition differs significantly between responders and non-responders. Notably, individuals who respond favorably to the treatment tend to have a gut microbiota enriched with species such as Bifidobacterium longum, Collinsella aerofaciens, Enterococcus faecium and Ruminococcaceae. Additionally, a clinical study on the gut microbiota and immunotherapy for melanoma reported a correlation between the composition of the gut microbiota and both the progression-free survival duration of patients after receiving immunotherapy and the occurrence of adverse events. Similarly, in patients advanced NSCLC, the abundant of Bifidobacteria, Lactobacillus, and Akkermansia muciniphila also correlated with ICIs clinical success and could serve as a predictive marker for the efficacy of anti-PD-1 immunotherapy. Despite these insights, research into how the gut microbiota augmentation can enhance the effectiveness of bladder cancer immunotherapy is still in its nascent stages, indicating a critical area for future investigation.

In the course of this investigation, fecal specimens were meticulously gathered from a cohort of 50 patients who were recipients of immunotherapy, adhering to rigorously defined inclusion and exclusion criteria. Through 16S rDNA sequencing analysis, significant differences in the gut microbiota between the NR and R groups were identified. Upon delving deeper into the data through the application of LEfSe and ROC curve analysis, it became evident that the presence of Blautia genus could serve as a potential biological marker for evaluating the effect of immunotherapy in bladder cancer patients. This pivotal finding not only enriches our understanding of the interplay between gut microbiota and immunotherapy outcomes but also sets a solid groundwork for future explorations into the underlying mechanisms.

The capacity of the gut microbiota to regulate host immunity and modulate antitumor responses has become increasingly apparent. CD8+ T cells play a pivotal role in this process, possessing the ability to directly target and destroy tumor cells, thus standing as a critical element in the antitumor immune response. Building upon this foundation, our exhaustive study reveals that oral administration of Bl. coccoides amplifies the antitumor impact of PD-1 blockade, characterized by an increase in IFN-γ and Granzyme B production by CD8+ T cells, and a decline in pro-inflammatory cytokine levels. This interaction between the gut microbiota and immune response, particularly the influence of the Blautia genus on CD8+ T cell activity, was supported by a growing body of literature. For instance, research conducted by Ye et al. highlighted a notable decrease in the population of acetate-producing Blautia species within the gut microbiota of cancer patients suffering from depression. They also confirmed that the Blautia-acetate axis can effectively activate CD8+ T cells to produce IFN-γ, thereby slowing disease progression. Similarly, Zhang et al. reported that Blautia producta, which is significantly increased in normal colon tissue, could impede colorectal cancer growth and enhance the immune surveillance capabilities of CD8+ T cells through the disruption of lysoglycerophospholipids metabolism. These insights align closely with our observations, underscoring the significant potential of Blautia species, to fortify antitumor immunity and enhance the efficacy of cancer immunotherapies.

The link between gut microbial metabolites and systemic immunity has been increasingly recognized, suggesting that these metabolites serve as crucial mediators connecting the gut microbiota to broader immune responses. Previous studies have investigated the role of gut microbiota and their metabolites in various types of cancer, such as colorectal, breast, and liver cancer, highlighting their influence on tumor progression and response to treatment. Despite this growing interest, the specific role of metabolites produced by Blautia in the context of bladder cancer immunotherapy had remained largely unexplored until our investigation. Our experiments revealed that heat-killed Bl. coccoides failed to amplify the tumor-inhibitory effects of PD-1 inhibitors. This observation led us to hypothesize that the metabolites secreted by this microbial community were the critical factors. Delving deeper through untargeted metabolomic profiling coupled with biological validation, we identified trigonelline as a key immunomodulatory metabolite enhancing the efficacy of anti-PD-1 therapy. Notably, trigonelline is a prominent pharmacological component found in traditional Chinese herbal medicine, as well as being an alkaloid abundantly present in coffee and fenugreek seed. Its significant roles in exerting antioxidant, antimicrobial, hypoglycemic effects have garnered substantial attention for its potential contributions to human health and disease. Building on these foundations, our investigation extended to examining the effects of gut-derived metabolite trigonelline within a bladder cancer animal model. The outcomes resonated with the impacts observed from Blautia coccoides, where trigonelline similarly fostered the infiltration of CD8+ T cells into the TME. These findings were further corroborated by in vitro assays, where our comprehensive research demonstrated that trigonelline-preconditioned CD8+ T cells exhibited increased cytotoxicity against 5637 tumor cells through the suppression of the β-catenin protein. Additionally, we confirmed the inhibitory effects on β-catenin protein expression, thereby deepening our understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms. The Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway is known for its potent immunosuppressive function within the tumor process. Aberrant activation of this pathway has been documented across various cancer types, including breast cancer, prostate cancer, and NSCLC, where it negatively correlates with clinical outcomes and survival rates. Therefore, targeting and inhibiting the key protein within this pathway presents a promising strategy to promote the activation and infiltration of immune cells into the TME, highlighting its potential as a target for therapeutic intervention. To summarize, trigonelline enhances the cytotoxicity of CD8+ T cells against bladder cancer cells by inhibiting the β-catenin protein expression, which is associated with tumors immunosuppression. By reducing β-catenin levels, this inhibition potentially improves immune cell activation and infiltration into tumors, offering a promising new avenue for cancer therapy.

The limitations of the present study are as follows. Although the study highlights the significant potential of Blautia coccoides in predicting the effectiveness of PD-1 inhibitor treatment, the generalizability of these findings is constrained by several factors. The relatively small sample size may affect the statistical significance and applicability of the results to larger populations. Moreover, factors such as patient age, gender, dietary habits, medication use, and regional differences could significantly influence gut microbiota composition and were not fully controlled in this study. These variables may introduce variations in gut microbiota among patients, potentially impacting the predictive capacity of Blautia coccoides. Future research should therefore involve larger, more diverse patient populations and account for individual differences in gut microbiota to better validate Blautia coccoides as a biomarker for predicting immunotherapy outcomes. While the mechanisms through which gut microbiota and metabolites modulate the immune system and enhance immune checkpoint inhibitor efficacy have been explored, further studies are needed to assess the clinical efficacy and safety of trigonelline, a metabolite produced by Blautia coccoides, in bladder cancer patients undergoing PD-1 inhibitor treatment. Additionally, future research should focus on the interactions between gut microbiota metabolites to optimize therapeutic effects.

In summary, our study provides support for the notion that gut microbiota Bl. coccoides-produced trigonelline could directly promote the anti-tumor response of CD8+T cell immunity and facilitate immunotherapy efficacy by inhibiting β-catenin expression (Fig. 7). Our findings unveil a novel metabolic pathway through which a probiotic species can influence antitumor immunity and boost the response to immunotherapy. This occurs offer a groundbreaking perspective on the intricate relationship between gut microbiota, metabolic products, and their profound impact on cancer therapy. By delineating this specific mechanism, our study not only elucidates the role of gut microbiota-derived compounds in immunomodulation but also highlights the potential of targeting microbial metabolites to improve therapeutic outcomes in cancer treatment.

Conclusion

Our study is the first to analyze the differences in the gut microbiota among bladder cancer patients receiving immunotherapy and to empirically demonstrate that Blautia and its metabolite, trigonelline, can enhance the infiltration of CD8+ T cells in the TME by inhibiting the β-catenin expression, thereby improving the therapeutic effect of PD-1 inhibitors in bladder cancer models. These findings hold significant potential for clinical applications, suggesting that modulating gut microbiota composition could be a viable strategy to personalize treatment approaches for bladder cancer patients. By identifying specific microbial markers and metabolites, we may develop targeted therapies that enhance immunotherapy efficacy. Additionally, we will be committed to exploring the broad applicability of these treatment strategies in different types of cancers and immunotherapies.

Author contributions

B.L.W, W.T.S.G and W.J.L made equal contributions to the research of the study. P.W. was the mind behind the concept and design of the study. B.L.W, W.T.S.G and W.J.L were responsible for conducting all experiments and preparing the samples. Z.R.Z performed the 16S rDNA and untargeted metabolomics analysis. Y.Y, Y.X.Z and Q.S.Y were in charge of collecting the fecal samples; Q.S verified the underlying data. B.L.W and W.T.S.G wrote the paper, M.X and J.W.X provided critical advice and extensively revised the manuscript. The final manuscript received reading and approval from all authors, who also ensure its accuracy.

Funding

Funding for this study came from the National Natural Science Foundation of China, under Grant Numbers 82173304 and 82370782, as well as the Guangzhou Key Research and Development Program, under Grant Number 2023B03J1245.

Availability of data and materials

The raw sequence data reported in this paper have been deposited in the Genome Sequence Archive (Genomics, Proteomics & Bioinformatics 2021) in National Genomics Data Center (Nucleic Acids Res 2022), China National Center for Bioinformation / Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (GSA: CRA015482) that are publicly accessible at https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/gsa.

Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate

Prior to the commencement of the study, approval was obtained from the Nangfang Institutional Research Ethics Committee (NFEC-202005-K7), and all participants provided their consent by signing an informed consent form.

Consent for publication

All authors have agreed to publish this manuscript.

Competing interests

None declared.
