---
pmid: '39463304'
doi: 10.1021/acsnano.4c09902
pmcid: ''
title: Spleen-Targeted mRNA Vaccine Doped with Manganese Adjuvant for Robust Anticancer
  Immunity In Vivo.
authors:
- Luo Zijin
- Lin Yi
- Meng Yanan
- Li Mengyao
- Ren Hongyu
- Shi Haoping
- Cheng Qiang
- Wei Tuo
journal: ACS nano
year: 2024
month: 11
volume: '18'
issue: '44'
pages: 30701-30715
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 58
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Manganese
- Spleen
- Mice
- Adjuvants, Immunologic
- Cancer Vaccines
- Mice, Inbred C57BL
- mRNA Vaccines
- Dendritic Cells
- Female
- RNA, Messenger
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Antigens, Neoplasm
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- mRNA-vaccine
cancer_types:
- melanoma
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes:
- STING
- stimulator of interferon genes
drugs:
- LNP
- Manganese
- Mn2+
- Mn@mRNA
- manganese
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: RNA Interference and Gene Delivery
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- colon tumor
- infectious diseases
- melanoma
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 38
icite_rcr: 6.183082045935484
icite_percentile: 95.0
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Spleen-Targeted mRNA Vaccine Doped with Manganese Adjuvant for Robust Anticancer Immunity In Vivo.

## Abstract

The successful application of mRNA vaccines in preventing and treating infectious diseases highlights their potential as therapeutic vaccines for cancer treatment. However, unlike infectious diseases, effective antitumor therapy, particularly for solid tumors, necessitates the activation of more powerful cellular and humoral immunity to achieve clinical efficacy. Here, we report a spleen-targeted mRNA vaccine (Mn@mRNA-LNP) designed to deliver tumor antigen-encoding mRNA and manganese adjuvant (Mn2+) simultaneously to dendritic cells (DCs) in the spleen. This delivery system promotes DC maturation and surface antigen presentation and stimulates the production of cytotoxic T cells. Additionally, Mn2+ codelivered in the system serves as a safe and effective immune adjuvant, activating the stimulator of interferon genes (STING) signaling pathway and promoting the secretion of type I interferon, further enhancing the antigen-specific T cell responses. Mn@mRNA-LNP effectively inhibits tumor progression in established melanoma and colon tumor models as well as in a model of tumor recurrence after resection. Notably, the combination of Mn@mRNA-LNP with immune checkpoint inhibitors further enhances complete tumor suppression and prolonged the overall survival in mice. Overall, this "All-in-One" mRNA vaccine significantly boosts antitumor immunity responses by improving spleen targeting and immune activation, providing an attractive strategy for the future clinical translation of therapeutic mRNA vaccines.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
