---
pmid: '39602959'
doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2024.113702
pmcid: ''
title: Emerging role of metabolic reprogramming in the immune microenvironment and
  immunotherapy of thyroid cancer.
authors:
- Li Shouhua
- Han Hengtong
- Yang Kaili
- Li Xiaoxiao
- Ma Libin
- Yang Ze
- Zhao Yong-Xun
journal: International immunopharmacology
year: 2025
month: 1
volume: '144'
issue: ''
pages: '113702'
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intimp.2024.113702
cited_by_count: 11
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Tumor Microenvironment
- Thyroid Neoplasms
- Immunotherapy
- Animals
- Cellular Reprogramming
- Metabolic Reprogramming
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- metabolic-targeting
cancer_types:
- thyroid
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- radioiodine
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer, Hypoxia, and Metabolism
diseases_annotated:
- TC
- Thyroid cancer
- cancer
- endocrine tumor
- malignancies
- thyroid cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 11
icite_rcr: 5.499985162128546
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Emerging role of metabolic reprogramming in the immune microenvironment and immunotherapy of thyroid cancer.

## Abstract

The metabolic reprogramming of cancer cells is a hallmark of many malignancies. To meet the energy acquisition needs of tumor cells for rapid proliferation, tumor cells reprogram their nutrient metabolism, which is caused by the abnormal expression of transcription factors and signaling molecules related to energy metabolic pathways as well as the upregulation and downregulation of abnormal metabolic enzymes, receptors, and mediators. Thyroid cancer (TC) is the most common endocrine tumor, and immunotherapy has become the mainstream choice for clinical benefit after the failure of surgical, endocrine, and radioiodine therapies. TC change the tumor microenvironment (TME) through nutrient competition and metabolites, causing metabolic reprogramming of immune cells, profoundly changing immune cell function, and promoting immune evasion of tumor cells. A deeper understanding of how metabolic reprogramming alters the TME and controls immune cell fate and function will help improve the effectiveness of TC immunotherapy and patient outcomes. This paper aims to elucidate the metabolic communication that occurs between immune cells around TC and discusses how metabolic reprogramming in TC affects the immune microenvironment and the effectiveness of anti-cancer immunotherapy. Finally, targeting key metabolic checkpoints during metabolic reprogramming, combined with immunotherapy, is a promising strategy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
