---
pmid: '39762427'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-84450-9
pmcid: PMC11704265
title: Intelligence analysis of drug nanoparticles delivery efficiency to cancer tumor
  sites using machine learning models.
authors:
- Mahdi Wael A
- Alhowyan Adel
- Obaidullah Ahmad J
journal: Scientific reports
year: 2025
month: 1
volume: '15'
issue: '1'
pages: '1017'
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-024-84450-9.pdf
cited_by_count: 14
mesh_terms:
- Machine Learning
- Neoplasms
- Humans
- Nanoparticles
- Tissue Distribution
- Bayes Theorem
- Algorithms
- Drug Delivery Systems
- Nanoparticle Drug Delivery System
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Computational Drug Discovery Methods
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- cancer tumor
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 10
icite_rcr: 5.000000001991686
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
biology_processes: []
resistant_states: []
pathway_targets: []
---

# Intelligence analysis of drug nanoparticles delivery efficiency to cancer tumor sites using machine learning models.

## Abstract

This study focuses on the use of machine learning (ML) models to predict the biodistribution of nanoparticles in various organs, using a dataset derived from research on nanoparticle behavior for cancer treatment. The dataset includes both categorical and numerical variables related to nanoparticle properties, with a focus on their distribution across organs such as the tumor, heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney tissues. In order to address the complex and non-linear nature of the data, three machine learning models were utilized: Bayesian Ridge Regression (BRR), Kernel Ridge Regression (KRR), and K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN). The selection of these models was based on their wide range of capabilities in dealing with non-linear relationships and data complexity. To further model performance and strength, the study also applied cutting-edge methods including the Firefly Algorithm for hyperparameter tuning and Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE) for feature selection. Based on higher R² and lower RMSE values for most output parameters, the study concluded that Kernel Ridge Regression (KRR) did better compared to other models in predicting biodistribution outcomes. The study revealed that machine learning models, particularly KRR, exhibit a high level of efficiency in accurately representing the non-linear characteristics of nanoparticle biodistribution. The results obtained provide valuable insights into the optimization of predictive models for the behavior of nanoparticles. These models can be further enhanced by the use of advanced feature selection and hyperparameter tuning techniques.

## Full Text

Intelligence analysis of drug nanoparticles delivery efficiency to cancer tumor sites using machine learning models

This study focuses on the use of machine learning (ML) models to predict the biodistribution of nanoparticles in various organs, using a dataset derived from research on nanoparticle behavior for cancer treatment. The dataset includes both categorical and numerical variables related to nanoparticle properties, with a focus on their distribution across organs such as the tumor, heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney tissues. In order to address the complex and non-linear nature of the data, three machine learning models were utilized: Bayesian Ridge Regression (BRR), Kernel Ridge Regression (KRR), and K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN). The selection of these models was based on their wide range of capabilities in dealing with non-linear relationships and data complexity. To further model performance and strength, the study also applied cutting-edge methods including the Firefly Algorithm for hyperparameter tuning and Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE) for feature selection. Based on higher R² and lower RMSE values for most output parameters, the study concluded that Kernel Ridge Regression (KRR) did better compared to other models in predicting biodistribution outcomes. The study revealed that machine learning models, particularly KRR, exhibit a high level of efficiency in accurately representing the non-linear characteristics of nanoparticle biodistribution. The results obtained provide valuable insights into the optimization of predictive models for the behavior of nanoparticles. These models can be further enhanced by the use of advanced feature selection and hyperparameter tuning techniques.

Introduction

Cancer is one of the major reasons for mortality worldwide which is gaining momentum in some countries. Treatment of cancer can be done via different techniques such as chemotherapy, surgery, etc. For development of medicines in cancer treatment, the main issue is to target the cancer site so that other normal cells remain healthy. This task is challenging as sophisticated materials and drug delivery design are required. Development of nanoparticles have been recently explored in advancing targeted cancer therapy where the nanoparticles operate as drug carrier to reach the target cancer site in patients. Polymeric nanoparticles are among the most widely used materials in cancer treatment due to their attractive properties.

Despite the emergence of nanoparticles in cancer therapy, the major problem towards developing this technique is low efficiency of drug delivery by nanoparticles to the desired site in body. Usually, only less than 0.7% of loaded rug in nanoparticles is delivered to cancerous tumors which is very low for efficient cancer treatment. Therefore, there is a definite need to design nanoparticles with high delivery efficiency (DE) for advancing targeted cancer therapy. For enhancing the DE in nanoparticles, pharmacokinetics and computational modeling strategies can be exploited. The modeling of drug efficiency can be done to analyze the DE for various formulations including nanoparticles and drugs. Exploring the DE for a wide range of nanoparticles and drugs is complex and challenging. As such, computational predictive models can help to design the targeted drug delivery in a shorter time.

The method of machine learning (ML) can be utilized in this context for analysis and design of drug delivery systems based on nanoparticles for targeted cancer therapy. Due to the complexity of the targeted drug delivery via nanoparticles, sophisticated models are required to be developed so that all underlying parameters to be considered. The type of nanoparticles, physical and chemical properties, as well as drug loading should be taken into account for estimation of DE in nanoparticle drug delivery.

ML techniques are increasingly supplanting traditional computing methods in various scientific fields including medical field for evaluation of drugs properties. Neural networks, ensemble models, and tree-based models offer novel solutions to diverse challenges such as medical applications. ML models possess the ability to analyze complex problems that encompass a multitude of input attributes and output values, thereby assisting in the identification of correlations between inputs and outcomes.

This study used ML models such as Bayesian Ridge Regression (BRR), Kernel Ridge Regression (KRR), and K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) for estimation of DE in various drug delivery systems considering most underlying parameters affecting delivery efficiency. The models are developed for the first time in evaluation of DE in targeted cancer therapy via nanoparticles. The models are new and different compared to the models used in our previous study for predicting delivery efficiency. These methods were chosen for their capability to handle the data’s complexity and nonlinearity, which included a mix of categorical and numerical variables related to nanoparticle biodistribution. Bayesian Ridge Regression was chosen for its ability to change regularization parameters, which improves model flexibility and performance. Kernel Ridge Regression is useful for capturing non-linear relationships in data, whereas K-Nearest Neighbors is a simple but effective regression technique that involves averaging the outputs of the nearest data points. Furthermore, methods such as feature selection with RFE and hyperparameter tuning with the Firefly Algorithm were used to enhance models’ performance and robustness in estimation of DE values. By combining these techniques, one guarantees a comprehensive analysis using their respective strengths to handle a range of the predictive modeling difficulties presented by the dataset.

In summary, this work makes contributions to cancer therapy by using sophisticated machine learning methods including BRR, KRR, and KNN to simulate intricate biodistribution patterns of nanoparticles in different organs. RFE feature selection and Firefly Algorithm hyperparameter tuning improve model performance and resilience in this work. Use of categorical and numerical variables allows for a thorough investigation of predictive correlations, which helps explain nanoparticle behavior in biological systems.

Data preparation

This dataset is derived from a research study in focusing on the biodistribution of nanoparticles in various organs of the body, including the tumor, heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney. The properties of nanoparticles as well as cancer type and drug dosage are considered for the estimation of DE. The dataset consists of 534 rows, capturing various properties and outcomes related to the administration of nanoparticles.

Categorical Variables:

Type

MAT

TS

CT

TM

Shape

Numerical Variables:

Size (log 10 nm)

Zeta Potential (mV)

Admin (mg/ kilogram)

Output Parameters:

DE_tumor (%ID)

DE_heart (%ID)

DE_liver (%ID)

DE_spleen (%ID)

DE_lung (%ID)

DE_kidney (%ID)

Detailed description of the input features and the outputs are described elsewhere. This dataset is valuable for studying the influence of various nanoparticle characteristics on their biodistribution across different organs. The inclusion of both categorical and numerical variables allows for comprehensive modeling and analysis.

Table 1 provides statistical details for the numerical variables in the dataset, such as Size (log 10 nm), Zeta Potential (mV), and Admin (mg/kg). It includes information on the range, mean values, and missing data points, highlighting the variability and completeness of the data related to nanoparticle characteristics and dosing.

Figure 1 is a bar plot that visualizes the distribution of the categorical input variables: Type, MAT, TS, CT, TM, and Shape. Each bar represents the frequency of occurrences for different categories within these variables, allowing for a quick comparison of how often each category appears in the dataset. Figure 2 presents a correlation heatmap of the output variables, illustrating the relationships between the distribution efficiencies of nanoparticles in various organs. The heatmap uses color intensity to indicate the strength of the correlations, providing insights into potential interdependencies among the organ-specific distribution outcomes.

Missing values imputation

Linear interpolation is a method used to determine missing values in a dataset by assuming a linear relationship between neighboring known data points. This approach determines the missing value by establishing a line connecting the two nearest observed values and computing the position on that line where the missing value is expected to be. In time series data, linear interpolation is highly advantageous as it preserves the inherent continuity of the data without introducing substantial bias.

In this study, we employed linear interpolation to handle missing values. An initial assessment demonstrated that this method provided effective imputation for our dataset, aligning well with its specific characteristics. Nevertheless, we recognize that other techniques may offer advantages for more complex datasets, which we plan to investigate in future work to further enhance data robustness.

Categorical features handling

For this aim we used One-hot encoding (OHE) in this study. OHE is a method used to convert categorical features into a numerical format suitable for machine learning models. In OHE, each category is represented as a binary vector, where the length of the vector equals the number of unique categories. For a given category, its corresponding vector has a value of 1 in the position representing that category and 0s in all other positions. This methodology enables machine learning algorithms to analyze categorical data without making any assumptions about the ordinal relationship between the categories.

Outlier detection using z-score

Outlier detection is a crucial method in data science, used to remove noise or investigate unusual observations within a dataset. It helps uncover hidden insights by identifying data points that differ significantly from others. The Z-score method is a long-established technique for detecting outliers.

The value of Z-score is calculated for a data point  in a dataset X, with standard deviation  and mean  using following equation:

This metric quantifies how distant a data point is from the mean in standard deviation units. Generally, data points with Z-scores above 2.5 or 3 are identified as outliers.

For outlier detection using the Z-score method:

Determine Z-Scores: For all data points, calculate the Z-score.

Threshold: Specify a threshold, often set at 2.5 or 3 standard deviations from the average.

Identify Outliers: label those points as outliers if their Z-scores are above the set threshold.

In this study, we applied the Z-score method for outlier detection, setting a threshold between 2.5 and 3 standard deviations. This range was selected based on common practice in similar biological and medical studies, where it effectively identifies significant deviations. Furthermore, our preliminary analysis indicated that this threshold adequately flagged anomalies specific to our dataset, thus helping maintain data quality without unnecessary exclusions. Using this method, we can easily and quantitatively spot out-of-the-ordinary data anomalies and remove them from training process to keep the models’ accuracy and generality.

Normalization

In this investigation, we employ MaxAbsScaler for feature scaling, which is especially suitable for data that is sparse or includes values with differing magnitudes. MaxAbsScaler scales each feature by its maximum absolute value, ensuring that all values fall within the range of [-1, 1]. This technique maintains the sparsity of the data by not altering the data distribution, a favorable aspect for algorithms sensitive to data distribution or functioning on sparse matrices. The MaxAbsScaler technique boosts the efficiency of machine learning models by normalizing the features to a consistent range, especially beneficial when the features exhibit diverse units or scales. This methodology is well-suited for algorithms like Support Vector Machines or Lasso, which can be influenced by the data scale. The choice of MaxAbsScaler in this study allows for efficient and effective feature normalization, enhancing the robustness and accuracy of the predictive models developed.

Feature selection using recursive feature elimination (RFE)

The Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE) technique is a widely used feature selection method that systematically identifies the most significant features in a dataset by iteratively eliminating the less pertinent ones. The process commences with training a model, such as linear regression, support vector machine, or any other machine learning algorithm, utilizing the complete feature set. Subsequently, after training the model, the importance of each feature is assessed, typically relying on the model’s coefficients or weights.

In each iteration, the feature with the lowest importance score, signifying its minimal impact on the predictive capability of the model, is removed from the dataset. The model is subsequently retrained using the condensed set of features, and this iterative procedure is further repeated. The process of recursive elimination persists until a predetermined number of features is preserved or until performance metrics suggest the presence of an optimal subset of features.

RFE is particularly advantageous because it accounts for feature interactions, meaning it doesn’t just consider each feature in isolation but evaluates its importance within the context of the other features. This makes RFE a powerful tool for improving model performance, as it can reduce the risk of overfitting by eliminating irrelevant or redundant features. Moreover, by simplifying the model, RFE can also lead to faster training times and more interpretable models. However, RFE can be computationally intensive, especially with large datasets, since it requires multiple model training iterations. Despite this, RFE remains a robust method for feature selection, particularly when model interpretability and performance are critical.

Modeling

Firefly algorithm (FA)

The Firefly Algorithm is a heuristic designed to solve optimization problems by mimicking fireflies’ flashing behavior. Each firefly represents a potential solution, with its brightness  reflecting the quality of that solution, . Fireflies are drawn to one another based on their brightness, and this attractiveness, denoted as , diminishes with distance . It can be represented by the equation , where  indicates the base level of attractiveness and  represents the absorption coefficient.

The motion of a firefly i towards a more bright firefly j is described as:

Here,  controls the randomization, and  is a random vector. The distance  between fireflies i and j is calculated using the Euclidean distance .

The algorithm iterates through evaluating brightness, moving fireflies toward brighter ones, and applying randomization until it converges to an optimal solution, effectively balancing exploration and exploitation in complex optimization landscapes.

The Firefly Algorithm (FA) is particularly suitable for hyperparameter tuning in regression models because it can effectively explore and exploit the search space. Hyperparameter tuning is the process of identifying the most effective combination of parameters that minimizes error or maximizes the performance of a model. The mechanism employed by the FA involves moving towards fireflies that emit brighter light, which signifies better solutions. This approach also incorporates randomness to prevent getting stuck in local minima, which is a common obstacle in hyperparameter tuning. Furthermore, the algorithm’s ability to adjust to different optimization landscapes enhances its effectiveness in navigating the complex and multidimensional hyperparameter spaces of regression models, resulting in enhanced model accuracy and performance.

The fitness function used in the FA algorithm for hyper-parameter optimization was a 5-fold CV R2 score for the model based on the candidate solution.

Bayesian ridge regression (BRR)

In this model, a norm regularization component is incorporated into its coefficient vector estimate. Unlike traditional methods with fixed regularization parameters, BRR adapts the regularization parameter to the data, enhancing its flexibility and performance. The primary function of BRR is formulated as follows:

In this equation,  is treated as a random parameter, estimated from the data, and  is assumed to follow a spherical Gaussian distribution, expressed as:

Here,  is a single precision parameter, and  denotes an identity matrix. Both  and  are determined by maximizing the log marginal likelihood, ensuring that the regularization adapts optimally to the data.

Furthermore, the gamma prior distribution for  and  is defined by four coefficients: , , , and . These parameters govern the distribution, contributing to the model’s robustness by incorporating prior knowledge and uncertainty.

Kernel ridge regression (KRR)

KRR extends linear ridge regression to capture complex, non-linear relationships through kernel functions, making it ideal for diverse applications. Regularization techniques, such as the ridge penalty, intrinsic to KRR, are crucial in determining the optimal kernel function, so addressing overfitting issues and enhancing predictive accuracy.

Consider a dataset  consisting of N data points collected from a sample, while the goal is to ascertain the optimal function that minimizes the MSE, computed collectively over  pairs as . Mean of  is commonly considered the best function for this application:

In this context,  represents a reproducing kernel Hilbert domain, and  signifies a regularization parameter.

K-nearest neighbors (KNN)

KNN is a facile, yet effective, supervised learning method for classification and regression as well. KNN predicts outcomes based on the average of the outputs from the nearest neighbors in the training set. KNN regression calculates the output of a query point by taking the average of the output values of its K-nearest neighbors. The Flowchart of KNN model is displayed in Fig. 3.

To predict the output for a new input (not is not included in training dataset), KNN regression identifies the k closest training samples utilizing a distance metric like the Euclidean distance. The model then calculates the average of output values of these k nearest neighbors to generate an estimation for the new input. The hyperparameter k plays a critical role in determining the model’s effectiveness. A model with a lower k typically exhibits more variability and complexity in comparison to a function with a higher k. Output for the unseen feature  is expressed as:

where  stands for the response of the i-th nearest neighbor to  in the entire training dataset.

Results and discussion

This section presents the performance evaluation of three machine learning models—Bayesian Ridge Regression (BRR), Kernel Ridge Regression (KRR), and K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN)—applied to predict the biodistribution of nanoparticles across various organs. The performance of each model was assessed using cross-validated R² scores and root mean square error (RMSE) metrics, emphasizing organ-specific distributions like tumor, heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney. Kernel Ridge Regression exhibited superior predictive accuracy compared to other models, demonstrating higher R² scores and lower RMSE values, indicative of its ability to effectively capture the dataset’s nonlinear attributes.

According to Tables 2 and 3 we can conclude that among 3 models of this study KRR performed best for prediction of the outputs. The results of the source paper are also reported in these two tables. The models in the source paper are:

Linear regression (LR).

Support Vector regression (SVR).

Random Frost (RF).

eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost).

Light Gradient Boosting Machine (LightGBM).

Deep neural networks (DNN).

Also, Table 4 presents the final selected features for predicting the biodistribution of nanoparticles in various organs. For each organ, the table lists the relevant features (such as size, zeta potential, and different nanoparticle materials) that contribute to the predictive models. Additionally, the table shows the mean percentage improvement in the R² value after feature selection, highlighting the contribution of these features to the accuracy of the model for each organ.

Based on these Tables, the KRR model outperformed the baseline model for several output parameters. Specifically, KRR achieved higher R² scores and lower RMSE values than the baseline for DEtumor, DEheart, DEliver, DEspleen, and DEkidney, indicating better predictive accuracy and a closer fit to the actual data for these outputs. For DEtumor, KRR showed a significantly higher test R² of 0.703 compared to 0.41 for the baseline model, along with a lower RMSE of 2.605 versus 2.02.

Similarly, KRR outperformed the baseline in predicting DEheart with a test R² of 0.900 versus 0.42 and an RMSE of 0.631 compared to 0.69. For DEliver, KRR demonstrated a notable improvement with a test R² of 0.791 and an RMSE of 8.436, whereas the baseline had a test R² of 0.45 and an RMSE of 7.89. The prediction of DEspleen also showed a marked enhancement using KRR, with a test R² of 0.964 and an RMSE of 0.8975, compared to the baseline’s test R² of 0.79 and RMSE of 1.27. Lastly, for DEkidney, KRR delivered a superior test R² of 0.964 and an RMSE of 0.896, outperforming the baseline’s R² of 0.83 and RMSE of 0.85.

However, for the DElung output, the KRR model did not surpass the baseline model. Although KRR achieved a test R² of 0.604 and an RMSE of 0.354, the baseline model had a slightly better performance with a test R² of 0.87 and an RMSE of 0.35. This indicates that while KRR is generally more effective for most output predictions, it is not universally superior across all metrics when compared to the baseline model. Our previous study indicated similar variations of the target parameter confirming the robustness of the developed new models in this work.

Figures 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 display parity plots comparing the predicted versus actual values for the Kernel Ridge Regression (KRR) model across different output parameters. Each figure illustrates the model’s accuracy in predicting nanoparticle biodistribution in specific organs: Fig. 4 shows results for tumors, Fig. 5 for the heart, Fig. 6 for the liver, Fig. 7 for the spleen, Fig. 8 for the lung, and Fig. 9 for the kidney.

Figs. 10.15 show Partial Dependence Plots (PDPs) for different model outputs and important numeric inputs, illustrating the relationship between specific features and the predicted biodistribution of nanoparticles. Figures 10 and 11 depict the effect of Size and Zeta Potential on DEtumor and DEheart. Figures 12 and 13 show how Admin (mg/kg) affects DEliver and DEspleen. Figures 14–15 illustrate the combined impact of Size and Admin on DElung and DEkidney, respectively, highlighting feature importance and their effects on predictions.

Conclusion

Using a dataset derived from research on nanoparticle behavior in mice, this work explores the application of ML models to estimate the biodistribution of nanoparticles in diverse organs. With an eye toward their distribution among organs including the tumor, heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney, the dataset consists in both categorical and numerical variables related to nanoparticle properties. Three machine learning models—BRR, KRR, and KNN—were used to handle the intricate and nonlinear character of the data. These models were chosen depending on their great spectrum of ability to handle data complexity and non-linear relationships. Advanced methods including the Firefly Algorithm for hyperparameter tuning and Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE) for feature selection were also included to improve model performance and resilience. Attaching the best R² scores and lowest RMSE values for most output parameters, the results showed that Kernel Ridge Regression (KRR) outperformed the other models in estimating the biodistribution outcomes. The findings of the work show that the non-linear characteristics of nanoparticle biodistribution are rather faithfully represented by machine learning models, mostly KRR. The obtained results provide important new perspectives on the optimization of predictive models for behavior of nanoparticles. Advanced feature selection and hyperparameter tuning methods can improve these models still more.

Publisher’s note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author contributions

Wael A. Mahdi: Writing, Conceptualization, Validation, Methodology. Adel Alhowyan: Resources, Formal analysis, Software, Visualization.Ahmad J. Obaidullah: Writing, Supervision, Investigation, Methodology.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.
