---
pmid: '39804528'
doi: 10.1007/s12035-024-04680-w
pmcid: ''
title: Emerging Trends in Neuroblastoma Diagnosis, Therapeutics, and Research.
authors:
- Sharma Rishabh
- Yadav Jaya
- Bhat Sajad Ahmad
- Musayev Abdugani
- Myrzagulova Syrsulu
- Sharma Deepika
- Padha Nipun
- Saini Manju
- Tuli Hardeep Singh
- Singh Tejveer
journal: Molecular neurobiology
year: 2025
month: 5
volume: '62'
issue: '5'
pages: 6423-6466
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 12
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Neuroblastoma
- Animals
- Biomedical Research
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- car-t
- crispr
cancer_types:
- neuroblastoma
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- ALK
- Akt
- MDM2
- PI3K
- mTOR
drugs:
- ROS
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Neuroblastoma Research and Treatments
diseases_annotated:
- NBL
- Neuroblastoma
- cancer
- cancers
- hypoxia
- metastasis
- neuroblastoma
- pediatric
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 9
icite_rcr: 4.500000001792517
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Emerging Trends in Neuroblastoma Diagnosis, Therapeutics, and Research.

## Abstract

This review explores the current understanding and recent advancements in neuroblastoma, one of the most common extracranial solid pediatric cancers, accounting for ~ 15% of childhood cancer-related mortality. The hallmarks of NBL, including angiogenesis, metastasis, apoptosis resistance, cell cycle dysregulation, drug resistance, and responses to hypoxia and ROS, underscore its complex biology. The tumor microenvironment's significance in disease progression is acknowledged in this study, along with the pivotal role of cancer stem cells in sustaining tumor growth and heterogeneity. A number of molecular signatures are being studied in order to better understand the disease, with many of them serving as targets for the development of new therapeutics. This includes inhibitor therapies for NBL patients, which notably concentrate on ALK signaling, MDM2, PI3K/Akt/mTOR, Wnt, and RAS-MAPK pathways, along with regulators of epigenetic mechanisms. Additionally, this study offers an extensive understanding of the molecular therapies used, such as monoclonal antibodies and CAR-T therapy, focused on both preclinical and clinical studies. Radiation therapy's evolving role and the promise of stem cell transplantation-mediated interventions underscore the dynamic landscape of NBL treatment. This study has also emphasized the recent progress in the field of diagnosis, encompassing the adoption of artificial intelligence and liquid biopsy as a non-intrusive approach for early detection and ongoing monitoring of NBL. Furthermore, the integration of innovative treatment approaches such as CRISPR-Cas9, and cancer stem cell therapy has also been emphasized in this review.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
