---
pmid: '39886486'
doi: 10.1136/bmjonc-2023-000054
pmcid: PMC11235023
title: 'Predictive biomarkers and specific immune responses of COVID-19 mRNA vaccine
  in patients with cancer: prospective results from the CACOV-VAC trial.'
authors:
- Spehner Laurie
- Orillard Emeline
- Falcoz Antoine
- Lepiller Quentin
- Bouard Adeline
- Almotlak Hamadi
- Kim Stefano
- Curtit Elsa
- Meynard Guillaume
- Jary Marine
- Nardin Charlee
- Asgarov Kamal
- Abdeljaoued Syrine
- Chartral Ugo
- Mougey Virginie
- Ben Khelil Myriam
- Lopez Morgane
- Loyon Romain
- Vernerey Dewi
- Adotevi Olivier
- Borg Christophe
- Mansi Laura
- Kroemer Marie
journal: BMJ oncology
year: 2023
month: null
volume: '2'
issue: '1'
pages: e000054
is_oa: true
oa_status: diamond
oa_url: https://bmjoncology.bmj.com/content/bmjonc/2/1/e000054.full.pdf
cited_by_count: 1
mesh_terms: []
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- mRNA-vaccine
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- CD8
- TIGIT
- interferon-gamma
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 Research
diseases_annotated:
- COVID-19
- cancer
- cancers
- metastatic
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 1
icite_rcr: 0.0728488472896844
icite_percentile: 3.8
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
biology_processes: []
resistant_states: []
pathway_targets: []
---

# Predictive biomarkers and specific immune responses of COVID-19 mRNA vaccine in patients with cancer: prospective results from the CACOV-VAC trial.

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVE**: Vaccinated patients with cancer in follow-up studies showed a high seropositivity rate but impaired antibody titres and T cell responses following mRNA vaccine against COVID-19. Besides clinical characteristics and the type of anticancer treatment before vaccination, the identification of patients susceptible to non-response following vaccination using immunological markers is worth to be investigated.

**METHODS AND ANALYSIS**: All patients (n=138, solid cancers) were included in the CACOV-VAC Study comprising three cohorts ((neo)-adjuvant, metastatic and surveillance). Immune responses were assessed using, respectively, anti-receptor-binding domain (RBD) SARS-CoV-S-IgG assay and interferon-γ ELISpot assay 3 months following the prime vaccination dose. Immunophenotyping of T cells and immunosuppressive cells from peripheral blood was performed before the prime dose. The serological threshold 3563 AU/mL was used to discriminate non-responders or suboptimal responders versus responders.

**RESULTS**: Most patients achieved seroconversion after receiving the two doses of vaccine (97.6%). The median serological level of anti-RBD SARS-CoV-S-IgG was equal to 3029 for patients at the metastatic stage. The patient's age was the main demographic characteristic that influenced vaccine efficacy. Among the immunological parameters measured at baseline, lower TIGIT (T cell immunoreceptor with Ig and ITIM domains) expression on CD8 T cells was associated with a better vaccine immunogenicity both in terms of humoral and cellular immune responses.

**CONCLUSION**: Despite a high seroconversion rate, median serological levels of patients with cancer, particularly elderly patients, were below the threshold equal to 3563 AU/mL considered as a humoral correlate of protection against SARS-CoV-2. Our findings suggest that the inhibitory receptor TIGIT might be an interesting predictive biomarker of COVID-19 vaccine immunogenicity and beyond in an anticancer vaccine context.

**TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER**: ClinicalTrials.gov Registry (NCT04836793).

## Full Text

Predictive biomarkers and specific immune responses of COVID-19 mRNA vaccine in patients with cancer: prospective results from the CACOV-VAC trial

Objective

Vaccinated patients with cancer in follow-up studies showed a high seropositivity rate but impaired antibody titres and T cell responses following mRNA vaccine against COVID-19. Besides clinical characteristics and the type of anticancer treatment before vaccination, the identification of patients susceptible to non-response following vaccination using immunological markers is worth to be investigated.

Methods and analysis

All patients (n=138, solid cancers) were included in the CACOV-VAC Study comprising three cohorts ((neo)-adjuvant, metastatic and surveillance). Immune responses were assessed using, respectively, anti-receptor-binding domain (RBD) SARS-CoV-S-IgG assay and interferon-γ ELISpot assay 3 months following the prime vaccination dose. Immunophenotyping of T cells and immunosuppressive cells from peripheral blood was performed before the prime dose. The serological threshold 3563 AU/mL was used to discriminate non-responders or suboptimal responders versus responders.

Results

Most patients achieved seroconversion after receiving the two doses of vaccine (97.6%). The median serological level of anti-RBD SARS-CoV-S-IgG was equal to 3029 for patients at the metastatic stage. The patient’s age was the main demographic characteristic that influenced vaccine efficacy. Among the immunological parameters measured at baseline, lower TIGIT (T cell immunoreceptor with Ig and ITIM domains) expression on CD8 T cells was associated with a better vaccine immunogenicity both in terms of humoral and cellular immune responses.

Conclusion

Despite a high seroconversion rate, median serological levels of patients with cancer, particularly elderly patients, were below the threshold equal to 3563 AU/mL considered as a humoral correlate of protection against SARS-CoV-2. Our findings suggest that the inhibitory receptor TIGIT might be an interesting predictive biomarker of COVID-19 vaccine immunogenicity and beyond in an anticancer vaccine context.

Trial registration number

ClinicalTrials.gov Registry (NCT04836793).

WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ON THIS TOPIC

Most anticancer treatments weaken our adaptive immunity, foreshadowing a reduced efficacy of vaccine such as COVID-19 mRNA vaccine. Recent studies show that patients with solid tumours might have an altered or suboptimal serology following prophylactic mRNA vaccine against COVID-19. Anticancer treatment, cancer type and stage, the timing for vaccination as well as the patient’s biological and immunological baseline characteristics are factors that might affect the vaccine response. Their impact in a real-world study on mRNA vaccine’s humoral and cellular responses is worth to be investigated.

WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS

This study demonstrated that despite a high seroconversion rate following vaccine against COVID-19 among patients with cancer, most of them did not reach a protective serological threshold against SARS-CoV-2 and only half of them had specific T cell responses. Importantly, elderly patients were less protected than the young ones. Among immunological parameters investigated, baseline levels of immunosuppressive cells (myeloid-derived suppressor cells and regulatory T cells) did not influence anti-SARS-CoV-2 vaccine immunogenicity. Importantly, TIGIT (T cell immunoreceptor with Ig and ITIM domains) lower expression by CD8 T cells at baseline was associated with a better vaccine immunogenicity both in terms of humoral and cellular immune responses.

HOW THIS STUDY MIGHT AFFECT RESEARCH, PRACTICE OR POLICY

Most of patients had a suboptimal serology 3 months following the first vaccine dose, suggesting the value of routinely monitoring patients’ serology to advocate or not an additional dose of vaccine, particularly for elderly ones. The interest of monitoring TIGIT receptor expression on CD8 T cells before the vaccination might have clinical implications that should be confirm in further clinical trials investigating curative anticancer mRNA vaccine.

Background

Patients with cancer are at higher risk of severe COVID-19. Studies demonstrated the ability of patients with cancer to mount adaptive immune responses following SARS-CoV-2 infection with some disparities in immunocompromised subgroups because of their anticancer treatment, corticosteroid or their cancer type and stage. Since the beginning of the vaccination campaign, available evidence suggests that patients with cancer are a priority population for COVID-19 vaccine. Given the limited and even the exclusion of patients with cancer from pivotal studies of mRNA vaccine, there is still insufficient awareness about vaccine efficacy relying on cancer type, anticancer treatment and the right timing for vaccination of those under treatment. Vaccinated patients with cancer in follow-up studies showed a high seropositivity rate but impaired antibody titres and T cell responses following the vaccination against COVID-19. Importantly, a major point remains the identification of a reliable immune correlate of protection, taking into consideration the emergence of novel variants of concern (VOCs). Interestingly, VOCs have been shown to escape humoral immunity, mostly due to mutations within the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of SARS-CoV-2, unlike cellular response. Indeed, mutations known to impact T cell recognition are not localised within the RBD of the spike protein. 

Beyond clinical characteristics and the type of anticancer treatment before vaccination, identifying patients susceptible to non-response after vaccination using immunological markers is worth to be investigated. Currently, there is still a lack of literature on the relationship between regulatory T cell (Treg) and myeloid-derived suppressor cell (MDSC) rates with COVID-19 successful immunisation. One study applying a high dimensional immune profiling on 92 healthy vaccinees quantifying 18 immune cell subsets identifies six vaccine-induced immune cell subsets that correlate with vaccine immunogenicity that do not include MDSCs. Furthermore, the phenotype of T cells among patients with cancer just before SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccination has been poorly investigated. Inhibitory receptors like T cell immunoreceptor with Ig and ITIM domains (TIGIT) and programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) are largely expressed by circulating T cells of patients with cancer justifying to be mindful to their expression in a pre-vaccination context. 

In the present study, we analysed both humoral and cellular immune responses of 138 patients with solid tumours 3 months after the first mRNA COVID-19 vaccination dose and humoral responses 6 months after the first vaccination dose. Patients were separated according to their curative or palliative anticancer treatment. Then, we analysed clinical and biological parameters according to the serological threshold fixed at 3563 AU/mL. The existence of an optimal timing between anticancer treatment and vaccination was also investigated. Finally, we monitored immune parameters just before the vaccination phase to explore the existence of predictive factors for a successful immunisation against SARS-CoV-2.

Material and methods

Patients and study design

We have started a prospective monocentric trial entitled CACOV-VAC (NCT04836793) in April 2021. All patients were enrolled after the signature of informed consent in accordance with the French regulation. Three cohorts of patients were enrolled: (1) patients in (neo)-adjuvant setting, (2) patients with metastatic solid tumours, (3) patients in surveillance (last treatment above 6 months). The analysed population was vaccinated against COVID-19 between January 2021 and November 2021. Patients with solid tumours were included if they were free of symptomatic COVID-19 infection 3 months before the vaccination date and if they signed the informed consent. The primary objective of the trial was to assess the ability of patients with cancer to mount efficient immune response following COVID-19 vaccination.

Vaccination phase and blood sample collection

All patients included in our trial received two doses of mRNA COVID-19 vaccine in accordance with the vaccination schedule recommended in early 2021. The mean delay between two doses was 28 days (95% CI 26.0 to 28.0). The patient’s blood sample was collected just before the first vaccination dose (the same day, corresponding to day 0). The second blood sample was collected at 3 months after the first vaccination dose and the third blood sample was collected at 6 months.

Synthetic peptides

Peptides covering SARS-CoV-S protein were purchased from Miltenyi Biotec. Peptivator peptide pools consisting of 15-mer sequences with 11 amino acids overlap represent both CD4 and CD8 T cells, covering the N-terminal S1 domain sequence of the S protein (1–692 amino acid named SARS-CoV-Prot_S1), consisting of two functional domains: the S1 domain contains the surface binding site to the ACE2 receptor and the S2 subunit mediates membrane fusion.

Assessment of spontaneous T cell responses against SARS-CoV-S by interferon-γ ELISpot assay

Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from patients with cancer and healthy donors were isolated by density centrifugation on Ficoll gradient (Eurobio). PBMCs were cryopreserved at a cell density of 8–12×106 cells/vial in CryoStor (CS10 and CS5) cell preservation media (Sigma-Aldrich) and were conserved at −196°C for flow cytometry and ELISpot assay analysis. Plasma from patients with cancer was isolated by centrifugation and conserved at −80°C for ELISA analysis. PBMCs and plasma were analysed before, 3 months following the first mRNA COVID-19 vaccination dose and 6 months following the first vaccination dose.

The interferon-γ (IFNγ)-producing SARS-CoV-S-specific T cell responses were quantified by ELISpot assay. For that, 3×105 PBMCs/well were cultured in anti-human IFNγ monoclonal antibody in ELISpot plate with the SARS-CoV-Prot_S1 PepTivator (1 µg of peptide/mL) in X-Vivo 15 medium (Lonza) for 48 hours at 37°C. Cells cultured with medium alone or Phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate/ionomycin (250 ng/mL; 10 µg/mL, Sigma-Aldrich) were used as negative and positive controls, respectively. All experiments were conducted in duplicates and each result presented is the mean of the duplicates. The IFNγ’s spots were revealed following the manufacturer’s instructions (Diaclone). Estimation of specific T cell number was expressed as spot-forming cells (SFCs)/3×105 PBMCs and calculated after subtracting negative control values (background). SFCs were counted using the CTL Immunospot system (Cellular Technology Limited) and assessed with Immunospot V.5.0 analyser software. Responses were considered as positive when IFNγ spot number was ≥10 and ratio twofold above background. Only the positive intensities of specific immune responses were indicated in this study.

Flow cytometry

For surface staining, PBMCs before vaccination were washed and stained for 30 min at 4°C in PBS (phosphate-buffered saline)/0.01% BSA (bovine serum albumin) and 2 mM EDTA with the following Fixable viability Dye-eFluor 780 (eBioscience) and antibodies. Immune checkpoints and memory T cells were investigated performing surface staining with CD3-BV605 (clone HIT3a; BD Biosciences), CD4-BV786 (clone RPA-T4; BD Biosciences), PD-1-BV510 (clone EH12.1; BD Biosciences), CTLA-4-BB700 (clone BNI3; BD Biosciences), CD226-PercpCy5.5 (clone 11A8, Biolegend), TIGIT-APC (clone MBSA43, eBioscience), CD39-BV711 (clone A1; Sony), 4-1BB-A700 (clone 4B4-1; Sony), CCR7-FITC (clone 150503; Biotechne), CD95-BB700 (clone DX2; BD Biosciences) and CD45RA-APC (clone HI-100; BD Biosciences). Monocytic MDSCs (M-MDSCs) were characterised by surface staining using negative lineage Pacific blue (CD3, CD56 and CD19) (clone OKT3, HCD56 and SJ25C1; Biolegend), CD14-BV605 (clone M5E2; BD Biosciences), CD33-BV510 (clone WM53; BD Biosciences), CD11b-PeCy7 (clone ICRF44; BD Biosciences) and anti-HLA-DR-FITC (clone B-F1; Diaclone). For Treg analysis, T cells were first stained with surface antibodies CD3-BV605 (clone HTI3a; BD Biosciences), CD4-BV786 (clone RPA-T4; BD Biosciences), CD25-BV421 (clone MA-251; BD Biosciences), CD15s-A488 (clone LSLEX1; BD Biosciences), CD45RA-APC (clone HI-100; BD Biosciences), LAG-3-BV711 (clone 11C3C65; Sony), PD-1-BV510 (clone EH12.1; BD Biosciences) and CTLA-4-BB700 (clone BNI3; BD Biosciences). Intracellular staining was performed following the manufacturer’s instructions (BD Biosciences). T cells were fixed and permeabilised with Human Foxp3 buffer set and then stained with Foxp3-PE (clone 259D/C7; BD Biosciences). Samples were directly acquired on a Facs Lyric (BD Biosciences) and analysed with DIVA software.

IgG ELISA assay

IgG antibodies were detected to SARS-CoV-S using the anti-RBD SARS-CoV-S IgG assay on Architect I2000SR (Abbott). Samples with a result ≥50 AU/mL (7.1 binding antibody units (BAU)/mL) were considered positive according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Antibodies were considered to be at high levels above 3563 AU/mL (506 BAU/mL) for this anti-RBD assay in accordance with published data and with manufacturer’s instructions. Thus, patients with a serological threshold strictly inferior to 3563 AU/mL were considered non-responders or suboptimal responders, and patients with a serological threshold higher or equal to 3563 AU/mL were considered responders. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) status was determined using the Abbott Architect CMV IgG kit (Abbott) with a positive threshold value of 6.0 AU/mL.

Statistical analysis

Continuous parameters were summarised with median and IQR. Categorical variables were described using absolute and relative frequencies. Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test and Χ2 (or Fisher’s exact test, if appropriate) tests were used to compare median value of continuous parameters and frequencies of categorical parameters, respectively, between subgroups. Statistical analyses were performed using SAS V.9.4 (SAS Institute) and GraphPad Prism V.6 software (San Diego, California, USA). P values of <0.05 were considered statistically significant, and all tests were two sided. All p values are given on an exploratory purpose.

Results

Demographic and clinical characteristics of patients with cancer

We prospectively enrolled 138 patients with cancer, from whom 33 were in the (neo)-adjuvant setting, 100 at metastatic stage and 5 in surveillance (table 1). Patients’ median age at first vaccination was equal to 65.0 years (IQR: 54.8–75.2) and 37.0% (n=51) were older than 70 years. Beyond cancer, 28.3% (n=39) of patients had hypertension and 8.0% (n=11) had type 2 diabetes. Most common primary tumours were, respectively, located at the gastrointestinal tract 33.3% (n=46), the breast 31.2% (n=43), gynaecological organs 12.3% (n=17) and at the thoracic shaft 8.7% (n=12). Half of the patients had chemotherapy-based regimens during the vaccination phase. Regarding vaccination safety, 11.2% (n=12) of patients declared mild adverse events following the vaccination phase. Precision about anticancer treatment type ongoing during the vaccination phase is detailed in table 1. Briefly, 72 patients had chemotherapy-based treatment, of which 29.2% were in the (neo)-adjuvant setting and 70.8% in palliative setting (metastatic stage). Other patients had immunotherapy alone or in combination with targeted therapy (16.7%), targeted therapy and/or hormonotherapy (27.5%).

Complete blood counts were performed for most of patients (n=130) before the vaccination phase (table 1 and figure 1A). Regardless of the disease stage at vaccination, more than half of the patients had a lymphocyte count superior to 1 g/L. Neutrophil count was significantly lower in patients at metastatic stage compared with patients in the (neo)-adjuvant setting (p=0.020). Moreover, 124 patients out of 138 (92.8%) had a negative SARS-CoV-2 serology, and 84 patients out of 93 (90.3%) had no T cell responses against the spike protein before the vaccination phase. We noticed that six patients had a positive SARS-CoV-2 serology at baseline suggesting either a past infection (beyond 3 months) or an asymptomatic infection in the last 3 months. All of them mounted a strong serological response following the vaccination scheduled at 3 months (superior to 20 000 BAU/mL). Three months following the first vaccination dose, the median serological level was equal to 3081.0 AU/mL (IQR: 653.0–11 561.0) for patients in the (neo)-adjuvant setting, 3029.0 AU/mL (IQR: 1125.0–7878.0) for patients at the metastatic stage and 13 994.0 AU/mL (IQR: 3112.0–28 132.0) for patients under surveillance (figure 1B). Median serological levels at 6 months were equal to 1041.0 AU/mL (IQR: 63.0–1581.0) for patients in the (neo)-adjuvant setting, 775.0 AU/mL (IQR: 337.0–1737.0) for patients at the metastatic stage and 3969.0 AU/mL (IQR: 1447.0–7004.0) for patients under surveillance. Additionally, we found that 30.3% of patients receiving chemotherapy at the time of vaccination had a serological threshold strictly inferior to 1000 AU/mL, while only 8.3% of patients free of chemotherapy had a threshold below 1000 AU/mL (p=0.0078). The rate of positive T cell responses 3 months following the first vaccination was equal to 49.5% (n=48) (figure 1C). Following a short stimulation, both CD4 and CD8 T cell elicited functional responses based on the secretion of IFNγ, interleukin 2 and tumour necrosis factor-α (data not shown). The detail of T cell responses according to patients’ disease stage is presented in figure 1D. Collectively, these data demonstrated that COVID-19 mRNA vaccine promotes humoral and cellular immune responses 3 months following the first vaccination dose. Dramatically, most of the patients were below the protective threshold in the third months, suggesting the interest of routinely monitoring patients’ serology to advocate or not an additional dose of vaccine.

Association of patients’ baseline characteristics and anticancer therapy with vaccine immunogenicity

The next set of analyses was dedicated to investigate demographic and clinical features of patients with cancer according to patients’ serological status. Feng et al  determined, using prospective data from a vaccination trial with 171 cases of SARS-CoV-2 infections and 1404 non-cases, that the antibody level which was associated with 80% vaccine efficacy against symptomatic COVID-19 was equal to 506 BAU/mL for anti-RBD IgG, corresponding to 3563 AU/mL and 264 BAU/mL for anti-spike IgG. Thus, patients with a serological threshold strictly inferior to 3563 AU/mL were considered non-responders or suboptimal responders, and patients with a serological threshold higher or equal to 3563 AU/mL were considered responders.

There was no difference between suboptimal responders and responders in terms of sex (p=0.890) and body mass index (p=0.806; table 2). However, patients’ age at vaccination was significantly higher in non-responders or low responders comparatively with responders both in the whole cohort (p=0.001) and in the chemotherapy-treated patients’ cohort (p=0.019) (online supplemental table 1). No differences in terms of disease stage (p=0.632) and ongoing anticancer treatment during the vaccination phase (p=0.474) were observed. Before the vaccination phase, the level of lymphocytes tended to be higher among protected patients (p=0.093). This result was similar when focusing on patients treated with chemotherapy-based protocols (online supplemental table 1).

Importantly, 54.8% and 88.2% of patients had a serological level below the threshold of 3563 AU/mL, respectively, 3 months and 6 months following the first vaccination dose (figure 1E). Of note, two patients with a negative serology at 3 months had a third dose of vaccine that promotes a serology superior to 3563 AU/mL.

Then T cell responses were analysed 3 months following the first dose of vaccine. Interestingly, 60.5% of responders had positive SARS-CoV-2-specific T cell responses vs 40.7% of non-responders or suboptimal responders (p=0.054). In the chemotherapy-treated patients’ cohort, there was no difference in their ability to mount specific T cell responses between responders (52.4%) and non-responders or suboptimal responders (46.4%) (p=0.680) (online supplemental table 1).

Altogether, these results suggest that the patient’s age was the main demographic characteristic that influenced vaccine efficacy. Likewise, protected patients tended to have more T cell responses than unprotected ones.

Timing of vaccination in relation to anticancer treatment did not affect SARS-CoV-2-specific humoral responses

A consensus on the best timing to administrate vaccines to treated patients with cancer has still not been reached. Thus, we next investigated if the timing of vaccination before and after anticancer treatment, with a focus on chemotherapy, might influence SARS-CoV-2-specific humoral immune responses. To this end, we analysed the serological index of each patient at 3 months in regard to the time between the last anticancer treatment and the first vaccination dose. Median time was equal to 7.0 days (IQR: 3.0–13.5) among non-responders or suboptimal responders and 6.0 days (IQR: 0.0–11.0) (p=0.180) among responders (table 3). When focusing on patients treated by chemotherapy, the median time was equal to 8.0 days (IQR: 3.0–14.0) among non-responders or suboptimal responders and 7.0 days (IQR: 2.0–14.0) (p=0.594) among responders (table 3). Interestingly, neither a timing threshold of 7 days (p=0.513) nor 10 days (p=0.542) predicted a successful immunisation for the whole cohort of patients with cancer. Similar results were obtained when focusing on chemotherapy-treated patients.

Whatever the anticancer treatment, no optimal timing for a successful vaccine immunisation was demonstrated, both in the whole cohort and in the chemotherapy-treated patients’ cohort.

Monitoring of biological and immunological parameters at baseline

We next explored biological and immunological parameters associated with SARS-CoV-2 vaccine immunogenicity among patients with cancer. We first analysed these parameters according to the serological threshold. Absolute lymphocyte count (p=0.090) and neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) (p=0.054) tend to be higher among responders (table 4, left part). Likewise, the CD4/CD8 ratio tended to be higher among responders (p=0.060). Among immunological parameters, CTLA-4 expression on CD4 T cells tended to be higher among non-responders or suboptimal responders (p=0.097), whereas TIGIT was less expressed by CD8 T cells among responders (36.3, IQR: 19.5–50.5 vs 44.8, IQR: 35.9–55.1, p=0.036). Memory phenotypes were similar regardless of the serological threshold with the exception of central memory (higher among non-responders or suboptimal responders) (p=0.007) and naïve phenotype (almost lower among non-responders or suboptimal responders) (p=0.052).

Then, biological and immunological parameters in relation to the SARS-CoV-S-restricted T cell responses were investigated (table 4, right part). Interestingly, neither the absolute lymphocyte count nor the NLR influenced the specific T cell responses. PD-1 expression on both CD4 and CD8 T cells tended to be higher among patients without specific T cell responses (p=0.096 and p=0.091), while CTLA-4 expression on CD8 T cells was higher on patients with specific T cell responses (p=0.044). Both responders and patients with specific T cell responses had a lower level of CD8 T cell expressing TIGIT than patients without T cell responses (37.4, IQR: 22.0–44.8 vs 46.2, IQR: 36.1–58.5, p=0.330). The expression of TIGIT by CD8 T cells at 3 months was similar to the one before vaccination (data not shown). At last, memory phenotypes were similar regardless of the serology index except for the naïve phenotype that tends to be higher in patients with specific T cell responses (p=0.078).

We finally analysed biological and immune parameters according to patients’ cancer treatment, grouped as follows: chemotherapy-based regimen versus other (figure 2 and online supplemental table 2). Neither the absolute lymphocyte count nor the NLR and CD4/CD8 ratio were dependent of anticancer treatments (figure 2A). CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression on CD4 T cells were similar whatever the anticancer treatment (figure 2B). Regarding CD8 T cells, CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression were similar whatever the anticancer treatment, whereas TIGIT expression tends to be lower in the group of patients treated by chemotherapy (figure 2C).

These data suggest that among immunological parameters measured at baseline, TIGIT lower expression by CD8 T cells was associated with better vaccine immunogenicity both in terms of humoral and cellular immune responses.

Presence of immunosuppressive cells in patients with cancer before COVID-19 vaccination did not impair specific immune responses

Finally, we wondered whether the baseline presence of immunosuppressive cells was altering vaccine immunogenicity. We first analysed the level of Tregs and M-MDSC as well as their immune feature according to the serological threshold. The level of naïve Tregs (nTregs) was higher among protected patients (1.1%, IQR: 0.9–1.8 vs 0.8%, IQR: 0.5–1.3; p=0.012), while the level of effector Tregs (eTregs) tended to be higher among non-responders or suboptimal responders (table 4). Considering immune feature of Tregs, there were no differences between responders and non-responders or suboptimal responders except for PD-1 expression by nTregs that was higher among unprotected patients (p=0.048). The level of M-MDSC at baseline was similar between both groups (1.5%, IQR: 0.6–2.9 vs 1.4%, IQR: 0.6–3.8).

Given these observations, we wondered about the level of Tregs and M-MDSC in relation to the SARS-CoV-S-restricted T cell response (table 4). In line with the results obtained regarding the humoral response, there were no differences depending on the T cell response except for PD-1 expression by nTregs that tended to be higher among patients without specific T cell response (p=0.063). The level of M-MDSC at baseline was similar between both groups (1.4%, IQR: 0.7–2.5 vs 1.5%, IQR: 0.6–3.8).

We finally investigated the level of immunosuppressive cells according to patients’ cancer treatment as described above. Neither the level of Tregs nor the level of M-MDSC was associated with anticancer treatments (figure 2D). Only the expression of LAG-3 by nTregs was higher among patients treated by chemotherapy, other immune parameters were similar between both groups.

To conclude, these results demonstrate that immunosuppressive cells did not affect anti-SARS-CoV-2 vaccine immunogenicity among patients with cancer at baseline apart from the level of nTregs, which positively influenced the humoral response.

Discussion/conclusion

Most anticancer treatments weaken our immunity, foreshadowing a reduced efficacy of vaccine whom COVID-19 mRNA vaccine. Recent studies show that patients with solid tumours might fail or suboptimally respond to such vaccines. Few real-world studies have been conducted to determine the impact of biological and immunological baseline characteristics of patients with cancer for vaccine response. The goal of this prospective study was to evaluate mRNA vaccine immune responses among patients with solid tumours 3 months following the first dose of vaccine. We observed that most of patients achieved seroconversion after receiving two doses of vaccine (97.6%). However, among them, less than a half were responders using the cut-off level of 3563 AU/mL (46.3%) suggesting the interest of routinely monitoring patients’ serology to advocate or not an additional dose of vaccine. The patient’s age was the main demographic characteristic that influenced the vaccine efficacy. As expected, responders tended to have more T cell responses than non-responders or suboptimal responders. From an immunological point of view, a low expression of the TIGIT immune checkpoint on CD8 T cells was associated with a better vaccine immunogenicity. At last, baseline levels of immunosuppressive cells (MDSCs and Tregs) did not influence anti-SARS-CoV-2 vaccine immunogenicity among patients with cancer at the exception of nTregs.

At the time of the first vaccination campaign, in early 2021, a correlate of protection was not yet known, since the prediction of vaccine effectiveness against SARS-CoV-2 infection has been demonstrated in both prospective and retrospective studies. Evidence that the level of neutralising antibodies is highly predictive of immune protection from symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection comes from the statistical model developed by Khoury et al. That study estimated the neutralising level required for 50% protection from COVID-19 to be equal to 20% of the mean titre for persons in the convalescent phase. A potential correlation of protection using prospective data from a vaccination trial with 171 cases of SARS-CoV-2 infections and 1404 non-cases was established by Feng et al. In this study, the antibody level associated with 80% vaccine efficacy against symptomatic COVID-19 was equal to 506 BAU/mL for anti-RBD IgG and 264 BAU/mL for anti-spike IgG. In our study, the Abbot technique detecting anti-RBD IgG was used. The correlation between BAU/mL and AU/mL corresponds to the formula 1 BAU=0142×AU, justifying the serological threshold used equal to 3563 AU/mL to discriminate responders and non-responders or suboptimal responders. In the trial published by Oosting et al,  a cut-off level at 300 BAU/mL (2113 AU/mL) was used to discriminate between suboptimal and adequate responders among patients receiving anticancer treatment. This was consistent with our threshold since the authors used an anti-spike IgG detection assay, approaching the 264 BAU/mL threshold determined by Feng et al, for antibodies targeting the spike protein. Finally, in another prospective multicentre study conducted among 1551 patients with haematological disorders, a serological titre cut-off of 250 BAU/mL was predictive of breakthrough infection and its severity. In this study, results were reported as SARS-CoV-2-reactive IgG BAU/mL. This was consistent with our threshold and the one of Feng et al, equal to 264 BAU/mL for anti-spike IgG.

In our study, most of patients had a SARS-CoV-2 antibody response 3 months following the beginning of the vaccination phase (consisting two doses of vaccine). This finding is consistent with previous reports evaluating mRNA-based vaccine efficacy among patients with cancer. However, we observed that more than half of the patients had a suboptimal response according to the cut-off level dichotomising responders from non-responders or suboptimal responders. Oosting et al previously suggested the interest of a third dose of vaccine that could potentially turn suboptimal responders into responders. To go further, in a context of recurrent seasonal epidemic of COVID-19, our study and others demonstrated the interest to monitor SARS-CoV-2-binding antibodies among patients with cancer to adapt the vaccination strategy to the antibody level.

We also analysed T cell responses against the spike protein among 97 patients with cancer. On the whole, 48 patients had a positive T cell response. As previously described, a cellular response was not systematically associated with a humoral response among patients with cancer. The rate of spike-specific T cell responses was lower in our study compared with that of Oosting et al (63.5%), while it was similar to that described by Cortés et al  (50.9% for CD4 T cell responses; 45.5% for CD8 T cell responses). Surprisingly, in relation to the serological threshold, rates of T cell responses were similar in our study and that of Oosting et al, with, respectively, 47% and 40.7% of T cell responses for non-responders or suboptimal responders and, respectively, 70% and 60.5% of T cell responses for responders. Currently, it remains unknown the extent of the magnitude of T cell responses and their correlation with COVID-19 protection. Nevertheless, unlike serological responses, several studies demonstrated that T cell responses against the spike protein were not affected by circulating variants. 

The right timing of vaccination with cancer treatment is key to achieving better seroconversion and vaccine protection, in a population already weakened by their illness and treatment. In the CACOV-VAC Study, local guidelines were most of the time followed. Indeed, immunosuppressive treatments (chemotherapy or corticoid) were discontinued, if possible, 10 days following each vaccination dose. Our results did not establish an optimal timing of vaccination according to humoral responses. In a recent study including 63 patients with cancer with solid tumour treated by chemotherapy, the timing of vaccination did not affect the vaccine-induced humoral responses. Additionally, our results are in line with other studies analysing other vaccine immunogenicity among patients with cancer with solid tumour such as influenza and pneumococcal vaccines. 

From an immunological point of view, M-MDSC levels did not impact vaccination immunogenicity both in terms of humoral and cellular response. This result was in line with the study of Takano et al on healthy vaccinees in which M-MDSC dynamics did not correlate with neutralising antibody response at the time of the first two doses of mRNA vaccine. However, the rate of nTregs (CD25+ FoxP3+ CD15s−) was significantly higher in patients with a serological threshold superior to 3563 AU/mL and the one of eTreg (CD25+ FoxP3+ CD15s+) tended to be lower in this category of patients. These observations support previous results demonstrating that eTregs are suppressive cells that might alter immune responses following TCR stimulation, unlike nTreg. A high and sustained expression of inhibitory receptors is a hallmark of exhausted T cells. Our results show that low TIGIT level on CD8 T cells was significantly associated with higher cellular and humoral responses following COVID-19 vaccination. In cancer context, TIGIT expression by CD8 T cells limits their effector function and expansion capacities. Why among all inhibitory receptors only TIGIT was associated with vaccine immunogenicity is worth to be further investigated in vaccination context. Here, we demonstrated that low expression of the TIGIT receptor might be an interesting predictive biomarker of vaccine efficacy.

This study had the inherent limitation that it was not powered to conclude for specific subgroups, such as patients’ tumour types or anticancer treatment regimens. Further analyses on memory T cell persistence and T cell correlates of immunity are still hardly needed especially in the context of VOC emergence and reduced humoral efficacy. Furthermore, the information about COVID-19 infection in the past 3 months was declarative and only patients with symptomatic COVID-19 during this period were excluded, in accordance with the vaccination recommendations at the time of the patients’ recruitment. Because cross-reactive peptides are mainly localised in the S2 subunit of the S protein, spontaneous T cell responses against the S1 subunit have been presented in this study. We noticed spontaneous T cell responses against the S2 subunit that were weaker compared with the one against the S1 subunit (data not shown). Collectively, these results demonstrated that despite a high seroconversion rate following vaccine against COVID-19 among patients with cancer, their median serological levels were below the threshold equal to 3563 AU/mL considered as a humoral correlate of protection against SARS-CoV-2. Importantly, elderly patients appeared to be less protected than the young ones. Among immunological parameters investigated, the inhibitory receptor TIGIT might be considered as an interesting predictive biomarker of COVID-19 vaccine immunogenicity and beyond in an anticancer vaccine context.

Contributors: Conception, design and supervision—MK, LM and CB. Development of methodology—MK, LM, CB, AF and DV. Statistical analysis—AF, DV and LS. Acquisition of data—LS, AB, KA, SA, UC, VM, MBK and ML. Analysis and interpretation of data—LS, AB, CB, MK, LM, QL, AF and EO. Writing, reviewing and/or revision of the manuscript—MK, LM, CB, OA, LS, EO and CB. Administrative, technical or material support—HA, SK, EC, GM, MJ, CN, RL and QL. Guarantor, MK.

Funding: This work was supported by a grant from the Fondation ARC (CANCER EMERGENCY 11 & COVID-19, December 2020) and from the regional health agency Bourgogne Franche-Comté (ARS BFC) to CB (Evaluation of efficacy and predictors of response to COVID-19 vaccine in cancer patients in hospitals of Regional Institute of Franche-Comté (IRFC), January 2021).

Disclaimer: The sponsors had no role in the study design, data collection and analysis, in the preparation of the manuscript or in the decision to publish.

Competing interests: None declared.

Patient and public involvement: Patients and/or the public were not involved in the design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination plans of this research.

Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.

Supplemental material: This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been peer-reviewed. Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the content includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.
