---
pmid: '39984913'
doi: 10.1186/s12885-025-13570-w
pmcid: PMC11843783
title: Conventional transarterial chemoembolization followed by irreversible electroporation
  for hepatocellular carcinoma.
authors:
- Zhao Meng
- Li Fubao
- Tian Chuan
- Cai Duo
- Wang Congxiao
journal: BMC cancer
year: 2025
month: 2
volume: '25'
issue: '1'
pages: '313'
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: https://bmccancer.biomedcentral.com/counter/pdf/10.1186/s12885-025-13570-w
cited_by_count: 0
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Carcinoma, Hepatocellular
- Middle Aged
- Liver Neoplasms
- Chemoembolization, Therapeutic
- Female
- Male
- Aged
- Electroporation
- Adult
- Treatment Outcome
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Radiofrequency Ablation
- Retrospective Studies
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- electrochemical-therapy
- frequency-therapy
cancer_types:
- liver
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Microbial Inactivation Methods
diseases_annotated:
- HCC
- hepatocellular carcinoma
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 0
icite_rcr: null
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
biology_processes: []
resistant_states: []
pathway_targets: []
combination_evidence: co-mention-only
tissue_categories:
- epithelial
---

# Conventional transarterial chemoembolization followed by irreversible electroporation for hepatocellular carcinoma.

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVES**: This study aimed to assess the effectiveness and safety of conventional transarterial chemoembolization (c-TACE) followed by irreversible electroporation (IRE) for the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).

**METHODS**: From January 2019 to September 2019, 12 patients with HCC who received c-TACE followed by IRE comprised the study group. The control group comprised 15 patients who received c-TACE followed by radiofrequency ablation (RFA). The 1-month, 3-month, 6-month, and 12-month local control rates and median progression-free survival (PFS) were compared between the two groups. Additionally, postoperative complications were assessed.

**RESULTS**: The study group comprised 12 patients (median age: 57.5 years; range: 46-68 years), while the control group consisted of 15 patients (median age: 56 years; range: 31-69 years). Local control rates at 1, 3, 6, and 12 months were 91.7%, 91.7%, 83.3%, and 33.3%, respectively, for the study group, and 73.3%, 66.7%, 66.7%, and 20.0% for the control group. Statistical analysis revealed no significant differences between the two groups. In terms of survival, 9 patients (75%) in the study group and 11 patients (73.3%) in the control group were still alive at the last follow-up. The median PFS was 8 months in the study group and 7 months in the control group, with no significant difference between the two groups (p = 0.96). Notably, no severe surgery-related side effects were observed in either group, and also no significant differences were found in postoperative complications between the two groups (p = 0.64).

**CONCLUSIONS**: The long-term therapeutic outcomes of c-TACE followed by IRE were found to be similar to those of c-TACE followed by RFA in the study. The research suggests that c-TACE followed by IRE offered an effective and safe treatment option for HCC.

## Full Text

Conventional transarterial chemoembolization followed by irreversible electroporation for hepatocellular carcinoma

Objectives

This study aimed to assess the effectiveness and safety of conventional transarterial chemoembolization (c-TACE) followed by irreversible electroporation (IRE) for the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).

Methods

From January 2019 to September 2019, 12 patients with HCC who received c-TACE followed by IRE comprised the study group. The control group comprised 15 patients who received c-TACE followed by radiofrequency ablation (RFA). The 1-month, 3-month, 6-month, and 12-month local control rates and median progression-free survival (PFS) were compared between the two groups. Additionally, postoperative complications were assessed.

Results

The study group comprised 12 patients (median age: 57.5 years; range: 46–68 years), while the control group consisted of 15 patients (median age: 56 years; range: 31–69 years). Local control rates at 1, 3, 6, and 12 months were 91.7%, 91.7%, 83.3%, and 33.3%, respectively, for the study group, and 73.3%, 66.7%, 66.7%, and 20.0% for the control group. Statistical analysis revealed no significant differences between the two groups. In terms of survival, 9 patients (75%) in the study group and 11 patients (73.3%) in the control group were still alive at the last follow-up. The median PFS was 8 months in the study group and 7 months in the control group, with no significant difference between the two groups (p = 0.96). Notably, no severe surgery-related side effects were observed in either group, and also no significant differences were found in postoperative complications between the two groups (p = 0.64).

Conclusions

The long-term therapeutic outcomes of c-TACE followed by IRE were found to be similar to those of c-TACE followed by RFA in the study. The research suggests that c-TACE followed by IRE offered an effective and safe treatment option for HCC.

Introduction

 Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is indeed the most common type of primary liver cancer.It is a significant global health concern. Globally, HCC ranks as the fourth leading cause of cancer-related deaths. Additionally, it holds the fifth position among all diseases in terms of prevalence and impact on human health.

Transcatheter hepatic arterial chemoembolization (TACE) is commonly selected as the primary treatment for unresectable HCC. TACE may not achieve complete ischemic necrosis in advanced HCC cases. This limitation is due to the tumor’s abundant blood supply.

Furthermore, the presence of collateral circulation complicates achieving full ischemic necrosis.

As a result, additional or alternative treatment strategies may be necessary to address the challenges posed by the vascular characteristics of advanced HCC lesions. Thus, the utilization of a combination of TACE and ablation therapies has been proposed to yield improved outcomes. Image-guided tumor ablation therapies are currently extensively utilized in clinical settings.

These therapies are used for treating a wide range of benign or malignant solid tumors. Most procedures rely on inducing thermal changes in tissues to cause cell death. However, inadvertent thermal damage to nearby non-targeted structures may lead to significant complications. In addition, the ablation of tissue near flowing blood is influenced by a phenomenon known as the ‘heat sink,’ leading to suboptimal temperatures and ultimately incomplete ablation. Irreversible electroporation (IRE) is a novel method used to treat solid tumors. This method exposes plasma membranes to an external electric field. The electric field modifies the transmembrane potential and creates nanopores. These changes alter cell permeability and ultimately trigger apoptosis. IRE has a unique characteristic of selectively affecting different tissues. Tissues with higher collagenous content, such as bile ducts and blood vessels, lack a typical cellular membrane structure. Because of this, IRE cannot effectively induce nanopore formation in these tissues. This selective property helps preserve these structures during treatment. In the current study, our aim is to assess the effectiveness and safety of c-TACE followed by IRE for the treatment of HCC.

Materials and methods

All the patients received treatments for HCC treatment had signed informed consent. Data collection and analysis for the retrospective study received approval from the institutional review board of the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, and the need for written informed consent from patients was waived.

Patients

In this retrospective cohort study, we conducted a review of electronic medical records of consecutive patients who underwent either c-TACE followed by IRE or RFA between January 2019 and September 2019. Follow-up data collection concluded on June 12, 2023. The inclusion criteria comprised: (1) Patient age between 18 and 70 years. (2) HCC without extrahepatic metastasis or portal vein invasion. (3) Tumor size of ≤ 4 cm and ≤ 3 tumors.

(4) ECOG performance status of 0–2. (5) Expected survival time of > 6 months. (6) Patients who declined surgical resection. (7) Completion of pre-operative laboratory examinations, enhanced CT, or enhanced MR examinations. The exclusion criteria were: (1) Presence of combined infectious diseases, severe coagulation disorders, and severe heart, brain, lung, or other organ diseases. (2) History of arrhythmia or epilepsy. (3) Acute myocardial infarction within the past 36 months. (4) Presence of cardiac pacemakers, defibrillators, electronic devices, or metal components within the body. (5) Inability to tolerate endotracheal intubation and general anesthesia.(Fig. 1).

c-TACE procedure

Patients with HCC initially underwent c-TACE before IRE or RFA. One of three interventional radiologists (Z.X.L., W.Z., L.L.Y., and X.D.L., with 30, 20, 10, and 10, years of experience performing c-TACE, respectively) performed c-TACE according to the following protocol: Visceral angiography of the abdominal vessels, including the superior mesenteric artery and common hepatic vessels, assessed the arterial blood supply to the tumor(s). A microcatheter (Progreat; Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) was placed superselectively into the feeding arteries of the tumor by using a coaxial technique. 40–60 mg of pirarubicin in 5–10 mL of lipiodol (Lipiodol Ultra-Fluide; Andre Guerbet Laboratories, Aulnay-sous-Bois, France) was injected slowly. Finally, perform further embolization with absorbable gelatin sponge particles (Gelfoam; Hangzhou Alc, China) until arterial flow stasis is achieved.

RFA procedure

RFA was performed by interventional radiologist X.K.H, who has 20 years of experience, under CT guidance. A commercially available ablation system (Covidien lc CTRF 220, Medtronic, Inc. USA) was utilized. Power settings and ablation times were set according to the manufacturer’s standard recommendations. Enhanced CT was carried out immediately to ensure that the ablation zone encompassed the entire tumor with an appropriate margin.

IRE procedure

IRE was performed by interventional radiologist X.K.H. He had 20 years of experience in interventional surgery and had obtained an IRE training certificate, under CT guidance. All interventions were conducted under general anesthesia, with the utilization of non-depolarizing muscle relaxants, cardiac synchronization, and monitoring as detailed in previous studies. An IRE system (YTL-GM01, Intelligent Health, Tianjin) was utilized. Needle electrodes were percutaneously positioned into the target tumor under CT guidance (GE Optima620, GE healthcare, USA), based on the operator’s judgment. The voltage was set at 3000 V, and the quantity of needle electrodes utilized, the active length of each needle electrode, and the frequency of electroporation applications varied depending on the dimensions and morphology of the lesion. Enhanced CT was promptly performed to confirm that the electroporation zone covered the entire tumor with an appropriate ablation boundary.

Follow-up after combination therapy

As per the institutional follow-up protocol, patients received enhanced MRI scans and laboratory tests at day 7, 30, and 90 following their treatments. Subsequently, follow-up appointments were scheduled every 3 months during the initial 2 years, and then transitioned to every 6 months thereafter. In cases of recurrence, the multidisciplinary tumor board recommended appropriate treatments such as RFA, IRE, Microwave Ablation (MWA), TACE, surgical resection, liver transplantation, or the administration of tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) or immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), based on factors including the patient’s performance status, liver function, and the characteristics of the recurrent tumor.

Definition of terminologies

Our study terminology is utilized to delineate the therapeutic outcomes and potential complications arising from c-TACE, followed by RFA or IRE therapy. Local tumor progression is specified as the appearance of an enhancing tumor at the periphery of the ablation zone, while distant intrahepatic recurrence is characterized by the appearance of one or multiple tumors outside the periphery of the ablation zone. The calculation of PFS encompasses the period from the date of the RFA or IRE procedure to either the date of tumor recurrence or the most recent follow-up prior to June 12, 2023. Complications, inclusive of fatal incidents, encompass adverse events occurring within 30 days following the procedures.

Statistical analysis

Differences in continuous variables between the groups were evaluated using two-sample t-tests. For categorical variables, the Chi-Squared test or Fisher’s exact test, as appropriate, was employed for analysis. Survival curves with 95% confidence intervals were generated utilizing the Kaplan-Meier method, and a log-rank test was conducted. Statistical analysis was conducted using the commercially available software SPSS Statistics (version 20.0; IBM, Armonk, NY). All comparisons were two-sided, and statistical significance was considered for P values less than 0.05.

Results

Patient demographics

 In Table 1, a total of 27 patients were included in the study, with 12 undergoing c-TACE followed by IRE (Fig. 2) and 15 receiving c-TACE combined with RFA (Fig. 3). The median age was 57.5 for the study group and 56 for the control group. There were no statistically significant differences observed in terms of gender, HBV infection, cirrhosis, Child-Pugh class, ECOG PS, and tumor size between the two groups. The interval between the treatments was 30.5 days (range, 2-110) in the study group and 17 days (range, 7–90) in the control group.

Efficacy and safety

During the median follow-up period of 49 months (range, 45–53 months), technical success was achieved in all patients (100%) with no surgery-related fatalities or major postoperative complications occurring. Grade I postoperative complications (abdominal pain, fever) occurred in 3 patients in the study group, while 6 patients in the control group experienced Grade I postoperative complications (Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 5.0)., no statistical significance was found (p = 0.64). As presented in Table 2, the local control rates at 1, 3, 6, and 12 months were 91.7%, 83.4%, 83.4%, and 33.3%, respectively, for the study group, and 73.3%, 66.7%, 66.3%, and 20.0% for the control group. No significant differences were observed between the two groups. The median PFS was 8 months (95% CI, 5.55–10.67) for the study group and 7 months (95% CI, 3.28–10.71) for the control group, with no significant differences found (Fig. 4, p = 0.96). At the last follow-up (June 27, 2023), 9 patients (75%) in the study group and 11 patients (73.3%) in the control group were still alive.

Discussion

The study validated the effectiveness and safety of c-TACE followed by IRE in treating HCC, suggesting that IRE can be considered as an ablation method following c-TACE for HCC treatment.

TACE has been widely utilized in HCC treatment for a considerable period, and its efficacy has been confirmed. However, the complete tumor necrosis rate with TACE alone is only around 20%. This limitation is due to several factors. These include collateral circulation, blood supply from multiple arteries, partial blood supply from the portal vein surrounding the tumor, and incomplete embolism. Therefore, combination therapy was employed to enhance the treatment efficacy for liver cancer.

Studies have demonstrated that the combination of RFA and c-TACE is effective and safe for treating HCC. This applies to early-stage HCC as well as intermediate- and large-size HCC. Furthermore, this approach has been shown to improve overall survival rates. As a result, it is considered a valuable option for managing HCC. Peng Yuan et al. showed that the disease control rate (DCR) and objective response rate (ORR) of advanced HCC was 35 (73%) and 42 (88%) for the TACE + RFA group, respectively, and the median PFS was 403 days in the TACE + RFA group. The efficacy of TACE + RFA is better than that of TACE alone. Tatehiro Kagawa et al. showed that the probabilities of overall survival at 1, 3, and 5 years in the TACE + RFA group were similar to those in the resection group in early stage HCC treatment. Chuan Hao Gui et al. analyzed eight retrospective studies and one randomized controlled trial, involving 1892 patients. Results indicated that TACE + RFA offered comparable oncologic outcomes in patients with HCC as compared with surgical resection in HCC.

Although numerous studies indicated that TACE followed by RFA is an efficient and safe treatment for liver cancer, thermal ablative techniques like RFA have several limitations. With the introduction of cardiac synchronization in IRE treatment delivery, the safety and efficacy of IRE for tumor ablation has been confirmed. IRE has several advantages compared to conventional heat-based ablative technologies. In cases where liver tumors are located near major blood vessels or vital organs that are at risk during thermal ablation procedures, IRE is considered a better choice due to its non-thermal nature and ability to spare surrounding tissues from heat-related damage. Naveen Kalr et al. evaluated the efficacy and safety of IRE in the treatment of unresectable HCC, the study included 21 HCCs in 21 patients with cirrhosis, results showed the median time to local recurrence and local tumor PFS were 4 months (range 3–4 months) and 7 months (range 3–30 months), respectively. And also, the safety was confirmed. A longer-term outcome of IRE for HCC treatment from a single center research showed that the median overall local recurrence-free survival was 34.5 months with a 6- and 12-month local recurrence-free survival of 87.9% and 83.6%, respectively. A nationwide multicenter study showed the median overall survival of HCC reached 35.0 months with IRE treatment.

The present study investigated the safety and efficacy of c-TACE followed by IRE for treating HCC. The results showed no statistical differences in basic characteristics between the c-TACE followed by IRE group and the c-TACE followed by RFA group. This indicates a well-matched comparison. Additionally, the absence of surgery-related fatal events or postoperative complications in both groups confirms the safety of the c-TACE followed by IRE approach. The study compared local control rates during the follow-up period. The c-TACE followed by IRE group showed higher rates at 1, 3, 6, and 12 months compared to the c-TACE followed by RFA group. However, these differences were not statistically significant. The median PFS was similar in both groups, indicating comparable outcomes in terms of disease progression. In summary, the study suggests that c-TACE followed by IRE provides a satisfactory local control rate for liver tumors. Its safety profile and efficacy are comparable to c-TACE followed by RFA. These findings offer valuable information for selecting treatment strategies for HCC patients. It’s essential to acknowledge the limitations of the study, as this helps interpret the results and guide future research. The study’s single-center nature and relatively small sample size could impact the generalizability of the findings. Additionally, the lack of analysis on factors affecting the control rate and the insufficient follow-up time for assessing survival time are important points to consider when interpreting the study results. Besides, artificial intelligence (AI) and image processing are developing fast in the diagnosis and management of liver cancer in recent years. The introduction of AI to guide surgery and data processing will go a long way towards the effectiveness and safety of treatment. The recognition of these limitations provides opportunities for future research expansion. Larger-scale studies with diverse patient populations are needed. Extended follow-up periods would also be valuable. These efforts will allow a more comprehensive assessment of the effectiveness and safety of TACE combined with IRE in HCC treatment. By addressing these limitations in future research, a clearer understanding of the potential benefits of this treatment approach can be established.

In conclusion, the study found that the long-term therapeutic outcomes of c-TACE followed by IRE were comparable to those of c-TACE followed by RFA. These results suggest that c-TACE followed by IRE is a safe and effective treatment option for HCC.

Publisher’s note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author contributions

M.Z. conducted all experiments, integrated data, edited figures, and wrote the manuscript; F.B.L., C.T. and D.C. help with the data collection and analysis; C.X.W. directed this study, designed the research, and gave key advice.All authors reviewed the manuscript.

Funding

This work was supported by Foundation of Taishan Scholars Project (tsqn202211361), National Science Foundation of Qingdao (23-2-1-200-zyyd-jch).

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

Abbreviations

CT

Computed Tomography

HCC

Hepatocellular Carcinoma

MRI

Magnetic Resonance Imaging

PFS

Progression-Free Survival

c-TACE

Conventional Transarterial Chemoembolization

RFA

Radiofrequency Ablation

IRE

Irreversible Electroporation
