---
pmid: '40079845'
doi: 10.1080/1061186X.2025.2479757
pmcid: ''
title: 'Redefining hepatocellular carcinoma treatment: nanotechnology meets tumor
  immune microenvironment.'
authors:
- Mi Chuanliang
- Liu Sai
- Chen Zhida
journal: Journal of drug targeting
year: 2025
month: 8
volume: '33'
issue: '7'
pages: 1125-1144
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 2
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Carcinoma, Hepatocellular
- Tumor Microenvironment
- Liver Neoplasms
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Nanotechnology
- Animals
- Nanoparticles
- Drug Delivery Systems
- Nanoparticle Drug Delivery System
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- nanoparticle
cancer_types:
- liver
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Phagocytosis and Immune Regulation
diseases_annotated:
- HCC
- Hepatocellular Carcinoma
- Hepatocellular carcinoma
- Tumor
- cancer
- malignancies
- neoplasm
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 2
icite_rcr: null
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Redefining hepatocellular carcinoma treatment: nanotechnology meets tumor immune microenvironment.

## Abstract

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most lethal malignancies worldwide, characterised by its complex pathogenesis and poor therapeutic outcomes. Despite recent advances in targeted molecular therapies, immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), radiotherapy and conventional chemotherapy, the 5-year survival rate for this neoplasm remains dismally low. The progress in nanotechnology has revolutionised cancer treatment in recent years. These advances provide unprecedented opportunities to overcome the current limitations of different therapeutic modalities. This review provides a comprehensive analysis of how nanotechnology interfaces with the tumour immune microenvironment (TIME) in HCC and can present a new frontier in therapeutic interventions for HCC. We critically overview the latest developments in nanoparticle-based delivery systems for various drugs and also other antitumor agents like thermal therapy and radiotherapy. We also highlight the unique ability of nanoparticles to modulate the immunosuppressive tumour microenvironment (TME) and enhance therapeutic efficacy. Furthermore, we analyse emerging strategies that exploit nanoformulations to overcome biological barriers and enhance drug bioavailability in HCC treatment.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
