---
pmid: '40072566'
doi: 10.1007/s00262-025-03992-7
pmcid: PMC11949242
title: Neoantigen-based mRNA vaccine exhibits superior anti-tumor activity compared
  to synthetic long peptides in an in vivo lung carcinoma model.
authors:
- Nguyen Cao Minh
- Vu Trung T
- Nguyen Minh Nguyen
- Tran-Nguyen Thao-Suong
- Huynh Chi Thien
- Ha Quang Thanh
- Nguyen Hoai-Nghia
- Tran Le Son
journal: 'Cancer immunology, immunotherapy : CII'
year: 2025
month: 3
volume: '74'
issue: '4'
pages: '145'
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s00262-025-03992-7.pdf
cited_by_count: 12
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Mice
- Cancer Vaccines
- Antigens, Neoplasm
- Carcinoma, Lewis Lung
- Mice, Inbred C57BL
- Disease Models, Animal
- Lung Neoplasms
- Peptides
- mRNA Vaccines
- Immunotherapy
- Female
- Humans
- RNA, Messenger
- Cell Line, Tumor
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Comparative Study
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- mRNA-vaccine
cancer_types:
- lung
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: RNA Interference and Gene Delivery
diseases_annotated:
- LLC
- Lewis Lung Carcinoma
- cancer
- lung carcinoma
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 10
icite_rcr: 5.000000001991686
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Neoantigen-based mRNA vaccine exhibits superior anti-tumor activity compared to synthetic long peptides in an in vivo lung carcinoma model.

## Abstract

Neoantigen vaccines hold great promise in cancer immunotherapy, but the comparative efficacy of different vaccine platforms, particularly in the context of tumor burden (TB), remains insufficiently studied. In this research, we evaluated the safety and therapeutic efficacy of synthetic long peptide and mRNA-based vaccines, both designed to target identical neoantigens across different Lewis Lung Carcinoma (LLC) tumor burdens. We employed the LLC syngeneic mouse model, a widely used preclinical model for aggressive and immunosuppressive tumors. Our findings demonstrated that the mRNA-based vaccine significantly outperformed the peptide-based vaccine in preventing tumor growth in mice with low TB. These results underscore the potential of mRNA vaccines as a more effective approach for treating aggressive tumors, contributing valuable insights for the future development of neoantigen-based cancer vaccines.

## Full Text

Neoantigen-based mRNA vaccine exhibits superior anti-tumor activity compared to synthetic long peptides in an in vivo lung carcinoma model

Neoantigen vaccines hold great promise in cancer immunotherapy, but the comparative efficacy of different vaccine platforms, particularly in the context of tumor burden (TB), remains insufficiently studied. In this research, we evaluated the safety and therapeutic efficacy of synthetic long peptide and mRNA-based vaccines, both designed to target identical neoantigens across different Lewis Lung Carcinoma (LLC) tumor burdens. We employed the LLC syngeneic mouse model, a widely used preclinical model for aggressive and immunosuppressive tumors. Our findings demonstrated that the mRNA-based vaccine significantly outperformed the peptide-based vaccine in preventing tumor growth in mice with low TB. These results underscore the potential of mRNA vaccines as a more effective approach for treating aggressive tumors, contributing valuable insights for the future development of neoantigen-based cancer vaccines.

Supplementary Information

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s00262-025-03992-7.

Introduction

Cancer immunotherapy leverages the immune system to fight cancer by enhancing its ability to target cancer cells. Tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) and tumor-specific antigens (TSAs) are key immunotherapy targets, as they are presented on tumor cell membranes. TAA-targeted therapies have shown success but risk autoimmunity due to expression in normal cells. TSAs, however, are mutation-derived and tumor-specific, making TSA-based therapies, particularly synthetic peptide vaccines, a promising option. Peptide vaccines offer safety, specificity, and ease of production, though they require high doses, strong adjuvants, effective delivery, and sustained presence in the body.

Recently, mRNA vaccines have emerged as a compelling alternative to TSA peptide vaccines. The mRNA-lipid nanoparticle (LNP) platform effectively addresses many issues associated with peptide vaccines by offering easier delivery, self-adjuvating properties, extended duration, and increased TSA production. Numerous studies have explored the application of TSAs in both peptide and mRNA vaccine formats to inhibit tumor growth, yielding significant results. In the NCT03480152 study, personalized tumor-specific antigens (TSAs) derived from mutations in TP53, KRAS, and PIK3CA were used to develop tandem minigene (TMG) mRNA vaccines for patients with metastatic gastrointestinal cancer. The vaccines were well-tolerated and generated strong T cell responses but did not result in tumor shrinkage. Despite the promise of these vaccines, the specific contexts in which they can successfully counteract the immunosuppressive strategies employed by tumors remain poorly understood. In this study, we investigate these dynamics using the Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) syngeneic mouse model, a notoriously difficult-to-treat cancer model, to evaluate the immunogenicity and anti-tumor efficacy of TSA-targeted peptide and mRNA vaccines (Fig. 1).

The LLC mouse model is particularly informative for studying tumor immune evasion, as it exhibits a variety of mechanisms that impede the body’s immune system. These mechanisms include the downregulation of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and II molecules, which are crucial for antigen presentation and recognition by T cells. Additionally, LLC tumors secrete immunosuppressive cytokines that further inhibit immune activation. They also promote the expansion of T-regulatory cells (Tregs) and myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), both of which play significant roles in dampening immune responses. Moreover, the LLC tumor microenvironment presents physical barriers that make immune cell infiltration challenging, compounding the difficulty of effectively targeting and eliminating the tumor. Given these complexities, the LLC mouse model provides an ideal platform for assessing the potential of synthetic long peptides (SLPs) and mRNA-based vaccines that target multiple neoantigens. By using this model, we aim to elucidate the immunological mechanisms at play and determine the efficacy of these vaccine approaches in overcoming the multifaceted immunosuppressive environment characteristic of LLC tumors.

Materials and methods

Cell lines and mice

The Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC1) cell line (CRL-1642) was obtained from ATCC and cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM; GIBCO, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (GIBCO, USA) and 1% penicillin–streptomycin (P/S; GIBCO, USA). Male C57BL/6 mice, aged 6–8 weeks, were purchased from BioLASCO Taiwan Co., Ltd.

Synthetic peptides

The 24-mer wild-type and mutant peptide sequences were obtained from a previous study and synthesized by GenScript Biotech (USA) with a purity of ≥ 98% (Table 1).

Syngeneic tumor mouse model

C57BL/6 mice were inoculated subcutaneously with either 50,000 (low TB) or 500,000 LLC cells (high TB) in the right flank. Tumor growth and body weight were monitored every two days, with tumor volumes measured using calipers and calculated as (A × B2) × 0.5 (A = length, B = width). Treatments began on day 14, when 80% of high TB mice had developed tumors, and on day 14 for low TB mice regardless of tumor presence (as tumors were often not detectable at this time in the low TB group). Treatments were administered every seven days. The study endpoint was defined as tumor volumes reaching 3000 mm3. Animal experimentation was approved by the Animal Ethics Committee A at the University of Science in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam (permit number 562/KHTN-ACUCUS), and mice were euthanized via CO2 inhalation.

For peptide vaccination, three different peptide formulations were used. One formulation contained a mixture of seven peptides at 14 µg/peptide, another consisted of three peptides at 33 µg/peptide, and the third included a single peptide at 100 µg. Each formulation was mixed with 50 µg of polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly(I:C)) in PBS, prepared in a total volume of 100 µL, and injected subcutaneously into the right flank.

For mRNA vaccination, mRNA-LNPs were administered intravenously (IV) into the tail vein and intramuscularly (IM) into the left hind limb, with each site receiving 1.5 μg of mRNA in a 100 μL volume.

IFN-γ ELISpot assay

ELISpot assay was conducted using the ELISpot Plus: Mouse IFN-γ (HRP) Kit (3321-4HST, Mabtech, Sweden) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Seven days after the final injection, mice were sacrificed, and splenocytes were isolated and rested for 48 h before the assay. The culture medium consisted of RPMI 1640 (GIBCO, USA) with 10% FBS, 1% penicillin–streptomycin, 10 μM HEPES, 50 μM 2-mercaptoethanol, and 20 ng/mL murine IL-2. For the assay, a single SLP at 40 μg/mL was co-cultured with 200,000 splenocytes in 200 μL of medium in a round bottom 96-well plate, incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. After refreshing the medium, cells were transferred to ELISpot plates and incubated for an additional 24 h. Concanavalin A (Invitrogen, USA), diluted 1:500, served as a positive control. Cytokine secretion was detected according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and spot forming units (SFU) were counted using an ASTOR 2 reader (Mabtech, Sweden). Negative control wells, containing no peptides, were used to normalize SFU values in peptide-pulsed wells. We chose to normalize the ELISpot data to the responses induced by the WT peptide to account for baseline T cell activation. This normalization method enables a clearer assessment of the mutant-specific immune responses by highlighting differences attributable specifically to mutant peptide stimulation.

Intracellular cytokine staining (ICS)

ICS was performed using the BD Cytofix/Cytoperm Plus Kit (555,028, BD Biosciences, USA) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Splenocytes from the ELISpot assay were transferred to U-bottom 96-well plates and incubated with BD GolgiPlug (1:1000 dilution) for 8 h at 37 °C. Afterward, the cells were washed with PBS, and Fc receptors were blocked using TruStain FcX PLUS (anti-mouse CD16/32) antibody (156,604, BioLegend, USA) for 15 min. The cells were then fixed, permeabilized, and stained with antibodies as per the kit instructions. After staining with PerCP/Cyanine5.5 anti-mouse CD3, PE anti-mouse CD8a, APC anti-mouse CD4, and FITC anti-mouse IFN-γ antibodies (all at 1:100 dilution), the cells were incubated overnight at 4 °C in the dark, washed, and resuspended in PBS for analysis on a NovoCyte Advanteon Flow Cytometer (Agilent, USA).

mRNA construction and production

To construct the mRNA, seven mutated peptides (Table 1) were linked using the GGSGGGGSGG linker to form a tandem minigene. A signal peptide sequence (MRVTAPRTLILLLSGALALTETWAGS) was added to the 3' end of the minigene using the same linker. An MITD sequence (IVGIVAGLAVLAVVVIGAVVATVMCRRKSSGGKGGSYSQAASSDSAQG-SDVSLTA) was linked to the 5' end with a GGSLGGGGSG linker. The complete insert was reverse-translated into RNA and codon-optimized (IDT, USA), with two stop codons (TGA TGA) added at the 5' end. The mRNA backbone was derived from previous work, with the modified T7 promoter and 3' UTR added to the 3' end, and the 5' UTR, poly(A) tail, and a BspQI restriction site included at the 5' end.

The full mRNA construct was cloned into a high-copy plasmid synthesized by Epoch Life Science (USA), transformed into NEB Turbo Competent E. coli (New England Biolabs, UK), grown for plasmid extraction, and linearized using BspQI (New England Biolabs, UK). In vitro transcription (IVT) was performed using the HiScribe T7 mRNA Kit with CleanCap Reagent AG (New England Biolabs, UK), supplemented with 1 U/µL RNase inhibitor and 0.002 U/µL pyrophosphatase (New England Biolabs, UK). To minimize innate immune responses, N1-Methylpseudouridine 5'-Triphosphate (TriLink, USA) replaced UTP in the IVT reaction. A similar process was used to create the wild-type plasmid and corresponding mRNA based on the wild-type peptide.

mRNA purification by HPLC

Following synthesis, the mRNA was analyzed using 2% agarose gel electrophoresis and purified by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). It was then concentrated using an Amicon Ultra Centrifugal Filter (30 kDa MWCO, Millipore, USA) to remove double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) and truncated molecules, as described by Karikó et al. (2011). A temperature of 55 °C was used for optimal results.

Dot blot analysis

The purified mRNA was tested for dsRNA contamination using a dot blot assay. Briefly, 100 ng of mRNA was blotted onto a Nytran SuPerCharge membrane (Cytiva, USA), dried, and blocked with 5% non-fat milk in TBS-T buffer (0.05% Tween-20). The membrane was incubated with a dsRNA-specific monoclonal antibody (J2) (RNT-SCI-10010200, Jena Bioscience, Germany) at a 1:100 dilution for 3 h. After washing, it was incubated with Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated goat anti-mouse secondary antibody (A32723, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) for 30 min and visualized using the iBright Imaging System.

LNP encapsulation

Lipid ALC-0315 (Sinopeg, China), DSPC (Merck, Germany), cholesterol (Merck, Germany), and ALC-0159 (Sinopeg, China) were dissolved in ethanol at 10 mM and mixed in a molar ratio of 46.3:9.4:42.7:1.6. Purified mRNA was diluted in acetate buffer (5.67 mM sodium acetate, 19.33 mM acetic acid, pH 4.0) to a concentration of 113.18 ng/µL. Lipid and mRNA solutions were combined using NanoAssemblr Benchtop cartridges (Precision NanoSystems, Canada), with flow rates of 2 mL/min for lipids and 6 mL/min for mRNA, achieving an N/P ratio of 6. The mRNA-LNP complex was collected and dialyzed overnight against PBS using SnakeSkin Dialysis Tubing, 10 K MWCO (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Nanoparticle size was measured using a Nanoparticle Analyzer (Horiba, Japan), and encapsulation efficiency was determined using the RiboGreen assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) as described.

For DiR staining, DiR (D12731, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) was added to the LNP at a concentration of 1% before mixing with mRNA and injected intravenously into the mice. The distribution was detected using the IVIS imaging system (Revvity, USA).

Cytotoxicity assay

LLC1 cells were stained with CellTrace CFSE (C34554, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and seeded into U-bottom 96-well plates at a density of 1,000 cells per well in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% FBS. After 24 h, SLPs (40 μg/mL) were added to each well and incubated for an additional 12 h. Following peptide incubation, the medium was replaced, and splenocytes were added at varying ratios (2:1, 5:1, and 10:1 splenocytes to LLC1 cells). After 8 h of incubation, the cells were washed twice with PBS and stained with Zombie Red viability dye (423,110, BioLegend, USA), diluted 1:500 in PBS for 20 min at room temperature (RT) to detect dead cells. After staining, the cells were washed with PBS containing 5% FBS to stop the Zombie Red reaction, trypsinized, washed with PBS, and resuspended in 100 µL of PBS. The samples were then analyzed by flow cytometry using the NovoCyte Advanteon Flow Cytometer (Agilent, USA). The number of dead cells was determined by subtracting the percentage of CFSE + Zombie + cells from the percentage of CFSE + Zombie– cells.

Results

Neoantigen-based SLPs show limited anti-tumor activity

While neoantigen vaccination using SLPs holds promise for inducing strong anti-tumor immune responses, its clinical application has faced limited success. To evaluate its efficacy, we vaccinated two groups of LLC-bearing C57BL/6 mice with a mixture of seven SLPs (Table 1), containing either LLC-specific mutations previously shown to induce neoantigen-specific immunity in tumor-naive mice or corresponding wild-type peptides. One group had low TB, while the other had high TB (Fig. 2A). Since tumor size prior to treatment varied among animals in the high TB model, we randomized the treatment groups to ensure a similar total TB across all groups at the start of the experiment (Fig. S1). In both cases, SLP-vaccinated mice demonstrated a favorable safety profile, with no significant changes in body weight or blood protein levels compared to mice treated with the adjuvant poly IC alone (Fig. S2).

We observed no significant differences in tumor volumes (Fig. 2B–E) or survival rates (Fig. S3A and S3B) between mice treated with mutant SLPs and those treated with wild-type SLPs under both conditions. These findings indicate that peptide-based vaccines demonstrated limited anti-tumor efficacy against LLC tumors. Next, we evaluated whether tumor-bearing mice generated immune responses to mutant SLP peptides by measuring ex vivo IFN-γ production in splenocytes from mice vaccinated with either wild-type or mutant SLPs. At baseline, no significant differences in IFN-γ production were observed between the two groups under both low and high TB conditions (Fig. S3C and S3D). We then performed in vitro stimulation using individual mutant SLPs and their corresponding wild-type peptides. After normalizing IFN-γ levels to wild-type SLP stimulation, we observed sporadic recall responses (fold change > 1) to the seven tested mutant peptides in splenocytes from mutant SLP-vaccinated mice or de novo response in splenocytes in wild-type SLP-vaccinated mice under low TB condition (Figs. 2F and S4A). However, no IFN-γ induction was observed in any vaccinated mice under high tumor burden (fold change < 1, Figs. 2G and S4B). Importantly, no significant differences in IFN-γ induction were observed between the two groups of splenocytes following stimulation with all seven tested mutant peptides under both conditions (Figs. 2F, G, S4A and S4B). These results suggest that neoantigen vaccination with SLPs elicited ineffective mutation-specific immune responses in LLC-bearing mice, regardless of TB.

To strengthen our findings, we examined various regimens for the SLP vaccines, including treatment schedules, dosages, and peptide components. We first assessed the timing of vaccination by injecting low TB mice with the 7-peptide pool vaccine (14 µg per peptide) at an earlier time point (day 7). We observed slower tumor growth in low TB mice vaccinated on day 7, suggesting that the innate immune response during early treatment may contribute to tumor growth suppression (Fig. S5A). However, similar to the treatment on day 14 (Fig. 2D), no significant differences were observed between wild-type peptide- and mutant peptide-treated mice (Fig. S5A). To increase the doses of peptides with confirmed immunogenicity while adhering to the overall maximal dose of a vaccine pool, as required by ethical regulations, we generated alternative peptide pools. These included 3-peptide pools containing three immunogenic peptides (Neo1, Neo3, and Neo4; Fig. S5B) at double the dose (33 µg per peptide) at two time points: day 7 (Fig. S5B) and day 14 (Fig. S5C). We also tested single-peptide pools containing individual immunogenic peptides at sevenfold higher doses (100 µg per peptide) on day 7 (Fig. S5D–S5F). Across all these settings, we observed no significant differences in tumor growth between mutant peptide- and wild-type peptide-treated mice.

Development of a mRNA-LNP platform for mRNA vaccination

Due to the limited efficacy of neoantigen peptide vaccines and promising results from mRNA cancer vaccine trials, we developed an mRNA-LNP platform as an alternative. This platform delivers mRNA encoding multiple neoantigens encapsulated in LNPs for in vivo vaccination.

We first performed IVT to generate neo-mRNA encoding 7 different neoantigens or 7 different corresponding wild-type peptides (WT mRNA), linked by the GGSGGGGSGG linker and flanked by 5’UTR and 3’UTR sequences, including a poly-A tail (Fig. 1). The resulting neo-mRNA and WT mRNA products had the expected length of 1298 bp with high integrity (Fig. 3A). To remove dsRNA, we purified the mRNA using HPLC, as described in the method section. This yielded purified mRNA in the F1 fraction (Fig. 3B), which exhibited a threefold reduction in dsRNA content, while the discarded F2 fraction showed an enrichment of dsRNA (Fig. 3C and 3D). These results confirm the successful generation of neo-mRNA and WT mRNA with low dsRNA levels. To prevent degradation in vivo, we encapsulated the purified neo-mRNA and WT mRNA into LNPs using a previously described formulation. A dynamic light scattering assay showed comparable size distributions between the neo-mRNA-LNPs and WT mRNA-LNPs, with the majority of particles ranging from 90 to 150 nm, which supports cellular uptake (Fig. 3E). Additionally, a RiboGreen assay confirmed encapsulation efficiency, with an average of 80%, indicating that most of the mRNA was protected by the LNPs (Fig. 3F).

Neo-mRNA vaccine induces neoantigen-specific responses in tumor-naive mice

Next, we examined the biodistribution of mRNA-LNPs in mice following intravenous (i.v.) injection of varying doses of DIR-labeled mRNA-LNPs (Fig. 4A). The majority of the mRNA-LNPs accumulated in the liver and spleen in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 4B and 4C). To evaluate the ability of mRNA-LNPs to induce neoantigen-specific immune responses, we measured IFN-γ production after stimulating splenocytes collected from neo-mRNA-LNP or WT mRNA-LNP vaccinated mice with either mutant or wild-type peptides. Splenocytes from neo-mRNA-LNP-vaccinated mice exhibited recall responses to all seven mutant peptides, with IFN-γ fold changes > 1 relative to their corresponding wild-type peptides (Fig. 4D). Importantly, these responses were significantly higher than those observed in splenocytes from WT mRNA-LNP-vaccinated mice, which showed no IFN-γ induction upon stimulation with the mutant peptides (Fig. 4D). These findings demonstrate the successful generation of neo-mRNA and WT mRNA encapsulated in LNPs, which effectively deliver neoantigens to lymphoid organs and induce neoantigen-specific immune responses.

Neo-mRNA vaccines induces neoantigen-specific anti-tumor immunity in mice with low TB

To evaluate the efficacy of the mRNA vaccine in vivo, we vaccinated mice with low and high TB using either neo-mRNA-LNPs or WT mRNA-LNPs, following a similar approach to that used for peptide vaccines (Fig. 5A). Consistent with results from peptide-vaccinated mice, mRNA-vaccinated mice displayed no noticeable safety concerns or pathological phenotypes (Fig. S6). We observed a comparable biodistribution of LNPs in tumor-bearing mice compared to naïve mice, with the majority of LNPs accumulating in the liver. Notably, we also observed LNP accumulation in the tumors of tumor-bearing mice (Fig. S7 and S8).

In the low TB group, all six WT mRNA-vaccinated mice developed tumors, with two succumbing to the disease. In contrast, five out of six neo-mRNA-vaccinated mice showed no significant tumor development, with only one mouse developing a small tumor by day 35 (Fig. 5B–D). Neo-mRNA-vaccinated mice also demonstrated better survival rates compared to those vaccinated with WT mRNA (Fig. S9A). However, in the high TB group, there were no significant differences in tumor volume (Fig. 5C–E), incidence (Fig. 5E), or survival rates (Fig. S9B) between the two groups.

Next, we assessed the immune responses to the tested neoantigens in tumor-bearing mice under both low and high TB conditions. Consistent with the SLP vaccination results, no significant difference in baseline IFN-γ production was observed between splenocytes from WT- and neo-mRNA-vaccinated mice under both low and high TB conditions (Figs. S9C and S9D). However, upon in vitro stimulation with mutant or wild-type peptides, significant IFN-γ induction (fold change > 1) was detected in splenocytes from neo-mRNA-vaccinated mice when stimulated with mutant peptides 1, 3, and 4 under low TB conditions, compared to their corresponding wild-type peptides (Figs. 5F, S10, and S11A). Importantly, these induction levels were significantly higher than those observed in splenocytes from WT-vaccinated mice, which did not exhibit any significant IFN-γ induction (Figs. 5F and S11A). In contrast, high TB mice did not exhibit significant neoantigen-specific immune response after in vitro stimulation with each of the seven peptides (Fig. 5G and S11B). These findings suggest that neo-mRNA vaccination can induce neoantigen-specific IFN-γ responses and anti-tumor immunity in low TB mice but fails to do so in high TB mice.

We next performed intracellular staining using flow cytometry to determine whether the enhanced IFN-γ production observed in splenocytes from mutant mRNA-treated mice under low TB condition originated from activated CD4⁺ or CD8⁺ cells. Splenocytes from mutant and wild-type mRNA-treated mice were stimulated with single SLPs (Neo1, Neo3, and Neo4) that had shown IFN-γ production in the ELISpot assay (Fig. 5F). Gating strategies used for analysis are presented in Fig. S12. The results showed no significant differences in the percentage (Figs. S13A and S13B) or fold change (Fig. 6A) of the CD3⁺CD4⁺IFN-γ⁺ population between splenocytes activated by mutant or wild-type mRNA treatment. However, significantly higher percentages were observed in the CD3⁺CD8⁺IFN-γ⁺ population of mutant mRNA-treated splenocytes stimulated with mutant SLPs (Neo1, Neo3, and Neo4) compared to wild-type peptides (Figs. S13A and S13C). When normalized by the fold change of mutant-stimulated versus wild-type peptide stimulation, significantly higher fold changes were observed for Neo1 and Neo3 in mutant mRNA-treated mice compared to wild-type mRNA-treated mice, with only an increasing trend noted for Neo4 (Fig. 6B). These findings suggest that the mutant mRNA vaccine activates CD8⁺ T cells to produce IFN-γ in a Neo1-, Neo3-, and Neo4-dependent manner.

To directly compare the safety and immune-activating ability of SLP and mRNA vaccines targeting identical neoantigens, we assessed body weight, histology, and blood hematology and biochemistry in mice vaccinated with either SLP or mRNA vaccines (Fig. S14). No significant differences were observed in safety profiles, including body weight and biochemical markers, between the two treatment groups. When evaluating tumor development, a clear distinction emerged between the two vaccine strategies. In the high TB model, all mice developed tumors, with no significant differences in therapeutic efficacy between the SLP- and mRNA-treated groups (Fig. S15A). However, in the low TB model, a striking difference was observed: all mice in the SLP group (4/4) developed tumors, whereas none of the mice vaccinated with mRNA developed tumors larger than 3000 mm3. Fisher's Exact Test yielded a p-value of 0.0079, confirming a statistically significant difference between the two groups (Fig. S15A). Furthermore, mice treated with mutant mRNA exhibited significantly higher levels of IFN-γ compared to those treated with mutant SLPs when stimulated with Neo1, Neo3, and Neo4 peptides (Figs. S15B and S15C). These findings underscore the superior immunogenicity of mRNA vaccines in activating the immune response and preventing tumor development in the low TB model.

Splenocytes from neo-mRNA-vaccinated mice exhibit enhanced cytotoxic activity against LLC1 cells

To understand how the immune response of mRNA-vaccinated mice influenced tumor progression, we performed a cytotoxicity assay using splenocytes isolated from vaccinated mice and unpulsed LLC1 cells (Fig. S16A). We observed a dose-dependent trend of increased killing activity against unpulsed LLC1 cells when co-cultured with splenocytes from mutant mRNA-treated mice compared to those from wild-type mRNA-treated mice. This difference was statistically significant at the 5:1 and 10:1 ratios (Fig. S16B). These findings suggested that T cells from mutant mRNA-treated mice exhibited stronger cytotoxic activity against unpulsed LLC1 cells than those from wild-type mRNA-treated mice. This indicated that mRNA-LNPs activated the immune system in mice, potentially preventing tumor development in low TB mice.

To further validate our in vivo findings, we evaluated the cytotoxic activity of splenocytes harvested from neo-mRNA-vaccinated mice (effector cells) against LLC1 cells (target cells) pulsed with mutant peptides 1, 3 and 4, which elicited the strongest in vivo responses (Fig. 7A). At an effector-to-target ratio of 2:1, no differences in killing activity were observed between splenocytes from neo-mRNA and WT mRNA-vaccinated mice (Fig. 7B–D). At higher effector-to-target ratios of 5:1 and 10:1, we observed significantly enhanced cytotoxic activity against LLC1 cells when co-cultured with splenocytes from neo-mRNA-vaccinated mice, compared to those from WT mRNA-vaccinated mice, in the presence of mutant peptides 1, 3 and 4 (Fig. 7B–D). Consistent with the IFN-γ responses, these results suggest that the neo-mRNA vaccine can activate splenocytes to exert enhanced cytotoxicity toward neoantigens, particularly those derived from mutations 1, 3 and 4. Overall, our findings indicate that the neoantigen-based mRNA vaccine induces specific immune responses and anti-tumor immunity in mice with low TB, though these effects may be suppressed in high TB scenarios.

When directly comparing the cytotoxicity of splenocytes isolated from vaccinated mice in the low TB model, we consistently observed a statistically significant difference between the SLP and mRNA groups in their ability to kill peptide-pulsed LLC1 cells. Across all tested peptides, splenocytes from mRNA-vaccinated mice exhibited significantly higher cytotoxic activity against LLC1 cells than those from SLP-vaccinated mice (Fig. S17). These results, supported by rigorous statistical analysis, demonstrate the superior efficacy of the mRNA vaccine over the SLP vaccine in activating cytotoxic immune responses.

Discussions

Personalized neoantigen-based vaccination is promising in cancer immunotherapy for targeting multiple tumor-specific antigens. Researchers choose between two main delivery methods: SLPs and RNA-encoding tandem minigenes (TMGs), each with specific advantages for different tumors and patient profiles. However, no guidelines exist for selecting between these methods, complicating vaccine development. Our study aims to fill this gap by evaluating the safety and efficacy of SLP and TMG vaccines targeting the same neoantigens across different TB, providing insights to improve future cancer vaccine protocols. In this study, TB refers to the number of cancer cells inoculated into the mice, while tumor mutation burden describes the number of mutations in the tumor’s DNA. We aimed to evaluate the efficacy of the vaccines under low and high TB conditions.

We used the LLC mouse model, an aggressive, immunosuppressive model often employed in cancer research to study lung cancer and test immunotherapies under challenging conditions. The seven neoantigen candidates selected for this study were chosen based on their proven immunogenicity and relevance to LLC tumor (Fig. 1 and Table 1), ensuring that our findings would be directly applicable to the development and implementation of neoantigen vaccines. A key observation in our study was that vaccinated tumor-bearing mice showed weak immune responses to the SLP-based vaccine (Fig. 2F–G), in contrast to the strong responses previously observed in tumor-naïve mice. The difference likely stems from the tumor's immunosuppressive environment, leading to T cell exhaustion, altered antigen presentation, or immune tolerance to neoantigens. In contrast, naïve mice, unaffected by these conditions, were able to mount a more effective immune response against the SLPs. We observed that some low TB mice responded to Mut SLP(s), while high TB mice showed no similar response (Fig. 2F). This difference may be due to the fact that T cells in the low TB model were not entirely suppressed and maintained a certain level of activation. Additionally, increasing the doses, adjusting schedules, and altering peptide components did not improve therapeutic outcomes (Fig. S5), confirming the ineffectiveness of the SLP approach for tumor vaccination under our testing conditions.

To improve tumor treatment beyond the SLP approach, we tested mRNA-based vaccines, which have several advantages: better antigen-presenting cell uptake, enhanced translation, and efficient HLA presentation. mRNA vaccines express multiple neoantigens, activating both CD8 + cytotoxic and CD4 + helper T cells for a stronger immune response, unlike peptide vaccines, which typically activate only one T cell type. They also have an intrinsic adjuvant effect via toll-like receptor activation, avoiding the inconsistent responses seen with external adjuvants in peptide vaccines. Lastly, mRNA vaccines offer prolonged antigen expression, unlike peptide vaccines, which degrade quickly and often need multiple boosters. To maximize the efficacy of mRNA vaccines in vivo, purifying the mRNA with HPLC and encapsulating it in LNPs is essential. This process removes dsRNA and truncated mRNA, minimizing unwanted immune responses. LNPs also protect the mRNA and facilitate efficient delivery to cells. Our current method for synthesizing LNPs has shown that we are able to eliminate a substantial amount of dsRNA prior to encapsulation. As a result, our LNPs contain predominantly single-stranded mRNA and exhibit uniform sizes (Fig. 3).

The IVIS results demonstrated that mRNA-LNPs successfully reached and accumulated in the lymphoid organs of naïve and tumor-bearing mice (Figs. 4, S7 and S8), consistent with findings that mRNA delivered via LNPs is transferred to the lymphoid system more efficiently compared to peptides. At high doses, LNPs were detected near the tumors in mice (Fig S7). This enhanced uptake, along with specificity of mRNA-LNPs, makes them a more effective option for targeted cancer immunotherapy. The mRNA vaccine's safety was also thoroughly evaluated, showing non-serious inflammation in key organs like the liver and kidneys in all mice (Fig. S6). There were no significant differences in weight changes between the mRNA-vaccinated groups, and blood analyses of serum hematology and biochemistry showed only minimal variations. Furthermore, mice vaccinated with mRNA displayed no significant differences in weight changes, hematology, or blood biochemistry compared to those treated with SLPs (Fig. S14). These findings further support the potential of mRNA-based vaccines as a safe and effective option for neoantigen-based immunotherapy.

The mRNA vaccine showed strong immune activation in low TB mice (Figs. 5, S9, S11 and S16) but its effectiveness diminished in high TB mice (Figs. 5, S9 and S11). This phenomenon may be attributed to the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment (TME), which can inhibit T cell activation or induce T cell exhaustion. Alternatively, altered antigen presentation due to high TB, as reported in a previous study, may enable tumors to evade immune detection through mechanisms such as MHC downregulation or upregulation of immune checkpoint ligands. Therefore, adjustments in dosing schedules or combination therapy may be needed for high TB cases. One low TB mouse in the Mut treatment group developed a small tumor, likely due to the loss of neoantigen, where the cell clone expressing the targeted neoantigen is eliminated while other surviving clones continue to proliferate.

RNA sequencing analysis confirmed that LLC cells express both wild-type and mutant allele transcripts for some neoantigens (Table 1). Peptide-MHC binding affinity was assessed as described, with a binding score below 3 indicating strong MHC binding (Table 1). However, due to negative selection in the thymus, T cells bearing TCRs with high affinity for wild-type peptides are likely eliminated during development. This process results in a peripheral TCR repertoire that predominantly consists of low-affinity TCRs for wild-type peptides, leading to reduced immunogenic responses. Consistent with this model, we propose that wild-type peptides predominantly induce baseline TCR activation, which corresponds with the low levels of IFN-γ production observed in PBMCs stimulated with wild-type peptides in vitro, as previously reported and shown in Figs. S3C, S3D, S9C, and S9D. Not all seven neoantigen candidates elicited immune responses, despite being encoded in the same mRNA, raising questions about the factors influencing immunogenicity. Only three (Neo1, Neo3 and Neo4) showed significant differences compared to the Wt treatment group, as evidenced by an increased number of IFN-γ–secreting cells in ELISpot and ICS assays (Figs. 5, 6 and 7), indicating their neoantigen specificity. These variations may result from the neoantigens' inherent properties, presentation context, or immune regulatory mechanisms that suppress certain responses. These findings suggest that specific mutations may enhance immunogenicity and could serve as promising candidates for vaccine development. Further research is needed to understand why some neoantigens fail to trigger an immune response, which could optimize neoantigen selection for future vaccines.

A direct comparison of the therapeutic efficacy of SLP and mRNA-LNP vaccines, with statistical assessment based on tumor development, survival rates, and immune system induction (measuring IFN-γ secretion and splenocyte cytotoxicity), demonstrated a higher efficacy of the mRNA-LNP vaccine under low TB conditions (Figs. S15 and S17). When considering these results alongside safety data (Fig. S14), we concluded that the mRNA-LNP vaccine is superior to the SLP vaccine in therapeutic effectiveness.

A significant limitation of our study is that we did not fully explore the mechanisms behind the differences in vaccine efficacy between low and high TB conditions. While neo-mRNA vaccination successfully induced strong neoantigen-specific immune responses and anti-tumor activity in mice with low TB, similar responses were lacking in those with high TB. This discrepancy raises several unresolved questions, as also noted in other research. First, we need to consider whether the increased tumor mutational burden (TB) and the tumor microenvironment (TME) work together to impair effective immune responses, potentially leading to T cell exhaustion due to chronic antigen exposure or antigen loss. Our study did not address potential T cell dysfunction or changes in antigen presentation. Second, we must assess whether the differing immune responses result from variations in immune response dynamics between high and low TB conditions. If so, this may necessitate different dosing schedules for high TB mice. Unfortunately, we did not explore these temporal aspects of immune activation. We recognize that peptide and mRNA vaccines differ fundamentally, each with inherent limitations. Our approach seeks to optimize the efficacy of both vaccine types while ensuring their evaluation reflects real-world conditions. This methodology aligns with established best practices in the field, as highlighted in recent reviews. Moving forward, we aim to further enhance mRNA vaccine efficacy by refining LNP formulations and optimizing vaccination strategies. Therefore, further research is essential to delineate the specific mechanisms that limit the effectiveness of neoantigen-based vaccines in high TB settings. Understanding these mechanisms could help inform strategies to overcome immune resistance and improve vaccine efficacy in more advanced stages of cancer.

Author contributions

Cao Minh Nguyen, Trung T. Vu, Minh Nguyen Nguyen, and Thao-Suong Tran-Nguyen performed cancer cell and vaccine injections, conducted downstream in vitro analyses, and were responsible for formal analysis, data curation, methodology development, and experiments. Chi Thien Huynh and Quang Thanh Ha managed mouse husbandry and monitoring, including tumor measurement, weighing, feeding, and sample collection at the endpoint. Hoai Nghia Nguyen provided supervision and guidance on conceptualization, while Cao Minh Nguyen and Le Son Tran contributed to conceptualization and manuscript writing. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Funding

This research was funded by a NexCalibur Therapeutic grant (NC01). Le Son Tran holds the equity in NexCalibur Therapeutic.

Conflict of interest

The authors declare no competing interests.

Ethical approval

Animal experimentation was approved by the Animal Ethics Committee A at the University of Science in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam (permit number 562/KHTN-ACUCUS), and mice were euthanized via CO2 inhalation.
