---
pmid: '40138743'
doi: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2025.104535
pmcid: PMC11985008
title: Pan-cancer clinical and molecular landscape of MTAP deletion in nationwide
  and international comprehensive genomic data.
authors:
- Ikushima H
- Watanabe K
- Shinozaki-Ushiku A
- Oda K
- Kage H
journal: ESMO open
year: 2025
month: 4
volume: '10'
issue: '4'
pages: '104535'
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2025.104535
cited_by_count: 14
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Neoplasms
- Purine-Nucleoside Phosphorylase
- Retrospective Studies
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Genomics
- Japan
- Adult
- Gene Deletion
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- synthetic-lethality
cancer_types:
- lung
- pancreatic
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- ALK
- EGFR
- KRAS
- MTAP
- PRMT5
- RB1
- ROS1
- methylthioadenosine phosphorylase
- protein arginine methyltransferase 5
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer-related gene regulation
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- MTAP deficiency
- Neoplasia
- Pan-cancer
- biliary tract
- cancer
- cancers
- lung
- lung adenocarcinoma
- pan-cancer
- pancreatic
- pancreatic cancer
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 9
icite_rcr: 4.500000001792517
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
biology_processes: []
resistant_states: []
pathway_targets: []
---

# Pan-cancer clinical and molecular landscape of MTAP deletion in nationwide and international comprehensive genomic data.

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND**: Early-phase clinical trials of protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) inhibitors as synthetic lethal strategies have shown promising efficacy in methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP)-deleted tumors. To refine and expand this promising therapeutic approach within the framework of precision oncology, it is critical to comprehensively characterize the clinical and molecular profiles of MTAP-deleted tumors.

**MATERIALS AND METHODS**: This pan-cancer retrospective cohort study analyzed clinico-genomic data from the Center for Cancer Genomics and Advanced Therapeutics (C-CAT) database, which includes 99.7% of patients who underwent comprehensive genomic profiling (CGP) in Japan between June 2019 and November 2023. Machine learning and explainable artificial intelligence methods were applied to identify clinical predictors of MTAP deficiency. Findings were validated and compared using The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) Genomics Evidence Neoplasia Information Exchange (GENIE) datasets.

**RESULTS**: Among 51 828 pan-cancer patients in the C-CAT cohort, MTAP deletion was observed in 4964 cases (9.6%), with a high prevalence in pancreatic (18.4%), biliary tract (15.6%), and lung (14.3%) cancers. MTAP deletion was associated with distinct clinical features, including male sex (56.0% versus 47.8%), older age (mean 62.4 versus 59.8 years), and shorter interval from diagnosis to CGP (median 380.0 versus 567.0 days). In pancreatic cancer, MTAP deletion was more common in KRAS-mutant tumors (19.8%) compared with KRAS wild-type tumors (8.9%). Across cancer types, MTAP deletion was less frequent in RB1-mutant tumors (pan-cancer: 3.2%, pancreatic: 7.6%, lung: 2.5%, biliary tract: 5.4%) than in RB1 wild-type tumors (9.9%, 18.7%, 16.1%, 16.0%). These findings were validated using the TCGA (n = 9896) and GENIE (n = 178 034) datasets. In lung adenocarcinoma, MTAP deletion was found in 22.8% of EGFR-mutated tumors, 25.0% of ALK-translocated tumors, and 20.8% of ROS1-translocated tumors.

**CONCLUSIONS**: MTAP deletion is associated with unique clinical and molecular features. These findings define the characteristics of MTAP-deleted cancers and provide a basis for synthetic lethal strategies in precision oncology.

## Full Text

Pan-cancer clinical and molecular landscape of MTAP deletion in nationwide and international comprehensive genomic data

Background

Early-phase clinical trials of protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) inhibitors as synthetic lethal strategies have shown promising efficacy in methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP)-deleted tumors. To refine and expand this promising therapeutic approach within the framework of precision oncology, it is critical to comprehensively characterize the clinical and molecular profiles of MTAP-deleted tumors.

Materials and methods

This pan-cancer retrospective cohort study analyzed clinico-genomic data from the Center for Cancer Genomics and Advanced Therapeutics (C-CAT) database, which includes 99.7% of patients who underwent comprehensive genomic profiling (CGP) in Japan between June 2019 and November 2023. Machine learning and explainable artificial intelligence methods were applied to identify clinical predictors of MTAP deficiency. Findings were validated and compared using The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) Genomics Evidence Neoplasia Information Exchange (GENIE) datasets.

Results

Among 51 828 pan-cancer patients in the C-CAT cohort, MTAP deletion was observed in 4964 cases (9.6%), with a high prevalence in pancreatic (18.4%), biliary tract (15.6%), and lung (14.3%) cancers. MTAP deletion was associated with distinct clinical features, including male sex (56.0% versus 47.8%), older age (mean 62.4 versus 59.8 years), and shorter interval from diagnosis to CGP (median 380.0 versus 567.0 days). In pancreatic cancer, MTAP deletion was more common in KRAS-mutant tumors (19.8%) compared with KRAS wild-type tumors (8.9%). Across cancer types, MTAP deletion was less frequent in RB1-mutant tumors (pan-cancer: 3.2%, pancreatic: 7.6%, lung: 2.5%, biliary tract: 5.4%) than in RB1 wild-type tumors (9.9%, 18.7%, 16.1%, 16.0%). These findings were validated using the TCGA (n = 9896) and GENIE (n = 178 034) datasets. In lung adenocarcinoma, MTAP deletion was found in 22.8% of EGFR-mutated tumors, 25.0% of ALK-translocated tumors, and 20.8% of ROS1-translocated tumors.

Conclusions

MTAP deletion is associated with unique clinical and molecular features. These findings define the characteristics of MTAP-deleted cancers and provide a basis for synthetic lethal strategies in precision oncology.

Highlights

We analyzed MTAP-deleted tumors in a national database, with validation using international datasets.

Explainable artificial intelligence showed association of MTAP deletion with age, sex, and time to standard therapy failure.

Higher MTAP deletion rates were observed in KRAS-mutant pancreatic cancer and lower rates in RB1-mutant tumors.

MTAP deletion was not mutually exclusive with actionable mutations (EGFR, ALK, ROS1) in lung adenocarcinoma.

Introduction

Methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP) plays a crucial role in the methionine salvage pathway and contributes to the recycling of methylthioadenosine (MTA), a byproduct of polyamine synthesis, into methionine. Loss of the MTAP function, often through homozygous deletions, is frequently observed in various cancers. MTAP deletion has been implicated in promoting tumorigenesis; however, the exact molecular mechanisms linking MTAP deletion to cancer progression remain an area of active research.

One of the most significant consequences of MTAP deletion is its effect on protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) activity. PRMT5 is an enzyme responsible for symmetric dimethylation of arginine residues on histones and other proteins, and is essential for regulating gene expression and cellular processes, such as proliferation, survival, and antitumor immunity. In the absence of MTAP, accumulated MTA binds to PRMT5, leading to the dysregulation of PRMT5 activity. Preclinical studies have shown that MTAP-deleted cells are particularly vulnerable to PRMT5 inhibition. This has prompted the development of MTA-cooperative PRMT5 inhibitors as a synthetic lethal approach specific for MTAP-deleted tumors.

PRMT5 inhibitors are currently being tested in clinical trials, with promising early results suggesting antitumor activity in patients with MTAP-deleted cancers. However, a critical gap remains in understanding the full spectrum of cancer types and patient populations harboring MTAP deletions. Identifying these patients is key to optimizing the clinical application of PRMT5 inhibitors and ensuring that these therapies are delivered to the most appropriate patient population. Furthermore, the development of combination therapies involving PRMT5 inhibitors is crucial for future clinical strategies. To achieve this, a deeper understanding of the molecular characteristics of MTAP-deleted tumors is essential.

The Center for Cancer Genomics and Advanced Therapeutics (C-CAT) database offers a comprehensive repository of cancer genomic profiling data from patients across Japan. It was launched in June 2019 and has collected comprehensive clinico-genomic data from over 60 000 patients across cancer types, making it one of the largest clinically annotated databases of its kind as a single platform. This database is unique in that the registered data are based on routine clinical practice of cancer treatment, not on academia-driven research or clinical trials. Furthermore, almost all patients (99.7%) who underwent comprehensive genomic profiling (CGP) in Japan have been covered by the C-CAT database (but only upon patient consent) according to the regulations of the national health insurance system. This resource provides an unprecedented opportunity to systematically analyze the clinical and molecular landscape of MTAP deletion across a broad range of cancer types and patient demographics.

In the present study, we conducted a large-scale analysis of MTAP deletion in cancer by leveraging the extensive C-CAT database. Our primary objective was to define the clinical and molecular features of patients with MTAP-deleted cancers to provide insights that could guide the future use of PRMT5 inhibitors and contribute to the development of personalized cancer therapies. Furthermore, to validate our findings, we will compare the results obtained from the C-CAT database with those from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and the American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) Project Genomics Evidence Neoplasia Information Exchange (GENIE), which are established international resources for genomic data.

Materials and methods

Data sources and study population

Our study used the dataset from the C-CAT, the national data center for cancer CGP in Japan. As of November 2023, three tissue-based and two blood-based CGP tests had been approved in Japan: FoundationOne CDx, OncoGuide NCC Oncopanel, GenMineTOP, FoundationOne Liquid CDx, and Guardant360 CDx. Anonymized data were obtained from the C-CAT portal site (https://c-cat_diagnostics.gn.external/start.html). Because OncoGuide NCC Oncopanel has been analyzing MTAP alterations since February 2021, we excluded data from patients tested by OncoGuide NCC Oncopanel before this date. Informed consent was obtained from the cancer patients before they were registered in the C-CAT database. Mutation and copy number variation data of TCGA PanCancer Atlas study and the AACR Project GENIE (v16.1) were obtained from cBioPortal (https://www.cbioportal.org/) and Synapse (https://genie.synapse.org/). Among the 178 034 samples in the GENIE dataset, copy number alteration of MTAP was analyzed in 55 564 samples (Supplementary Table S1, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2025.104535). Gene copy number alterations were defined according to each platform assessed. Cancer types were classified according to the OncoTree. This study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the Faculty of Medicine, the University of Tokyo (2021341G) and the Information Utilization Review Board of C-CAT (CDU2022-026N).

Machine learning model development

Python (version 3.9.5) was used to develop the machine learning models. The dataset was split into 80% training set and 20% test set. We constructed an eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) machine learning model to create prediction models for MTAP deletion. We used clinical data registered in the C-CAT database and accessible before CGP testing as input. All the input features are listed in our previous report. For cases in which prior cancer type-specific companion diagnostic tests were not carried out, missing values were filled in with ‘Unknown’. Intervals between the diagnosis and CGP or between specimen collection and CGP were calculated using the registration, diagnosis, and specimen collection dates. Categorical features were encoded using a one-shot encoding scheme. The hyperparameters were optimized using Optuna (version 3.4.0).

Explainability analyses

To identify features that contribute to model prediction, we applied the SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) algorithm (version 0.43.0) to the constructed machine learning models. This approach allocates a numerical value (SHAP value) to each feature to measure its impact on the model output and to provide a local explanation. A positive SHAP value increases the likelihood of the discovery of genome-matched therapies, whereas a negative SHAP value reduces the likelihood of discovery. The SHAP values for each feature and case in the test dataset were calculated, and the features were arranged in descending order of the mean absolute SHAP values.

Statistical analysis

To evaluate the trained models, we assessed the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) using the holdout test dataset. Differences in the proportion of MTAP deletion were tested using the chi-square test. Differences in the age were tested using Student’s t-test. To calculate the time to standard therapy failure, we used the date of CGP submission as a surrogate for the point at which standard therapy became ineffective, as CGP is covered by the national health insurance in Japan only for advanced solid tumors in patients who have completed or will soon complete standard therapy. Differences in the time to standard therapy failure or overall survival were tested using the log-rank test. Hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated using a Cox proportional hazards model.

Results

Clinical characteristics of patients with MTAP deletion

We analyzed the clinical characteristics of patients with MTAP-deleted tumors compared with those with wild-type MTAP, using data from the C-CAT database. Among the cases analyzed by liquid CGP, some are thought to lack detectable circulating tumor DNA, potentially resulting in false-negative findings in mutation analyses. Therefore, we excluded cases analyzed by liquid CGP and conducted our analysis on 51 828 patients. MTAP deletion was observed in 4964 cases (9.6%) of the total patient cohort (Table 1). There was a higher proportion of males in the MTAP-deleted group (56.0%) than in the wild-type group (47.8%). In addition, patients with MTAP deletion were slightly older than those with wild-type MTAP (mean 62.4 versus 59.8 years, P < 0.0001). In TCGA and GENIE datasets, MTAP deletions were observed in 8.9% (881/9896) and 6.6% (3674/55 564) of cases, respectively. Sex and age differences between MTAP wild-type and MTAP-deleted tumors were consistent with those observed in the C-CAT dataset (Table 1).

Machine learning-based prediction of MTAP deletion and identification of clinical features related to MTAP deletion

To identify the clinical factors associated with MTAP deletion, we first developed a machine learning-based prediction model using clinical data registered in the C-CAT database and accessible before CGP testing as input. An eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost)-based predictive model was trained to classify patients as MTAP deleted or wild type, based on their clinical characteristics. The model achieved a high predictive performance, as shown by the ROC curve (Figure 1A), with an AUROC of 0.794. To interpret the prediction model and identify the clinical features related to MTAP deletion, an explainability analysis was applied, allowing us to determine the clinical features that contributed to the prediction of MTAP deletion (Figure 1B). Cancer type has emerged as a key predictor, with pancreatic, brain, biliary tract, bladder, and lung cancers displaying positive SHAP values, suggesting a strong positive association with MTAP deletion. In contrast, colorectal, prostate, and ovarian cancers were associated with negative SHAP values. Additional significant features included advanced patient age, male sex, use of FoundationOne CDx (F1), and shorter time intervals between the cancer diagnosis and CGP or between a biopsy and CGP. In fact, MTAP deletion was identified in 11.0% of patients analyzed with F1, and the clinical characteristics in the F1 subgroup showed similar trends to those observed in the overall cohort (Supplementary Table S2, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2025.104535). A short interval from a biopsy or cancer diagnosis to CGP may reflect more aggressive or treatment-resistant characteristics of MTAP-deleted tumors, given that in Japan, CGP is covered by the national health insurance only for advanced solid tumors in patients who have completed or will soon complete standard therapies. To investigate the clinical behavior of MTAP-deleted tumors, we analyzed the time to standard therapy failure in pan-cancer patients with MTAP-deleted tumors using the date of CGP submission as a surrogate for the point at which standard therapy became ineffective (Figure 1C). The analysis revealed that MTAP-deleted tumors had a significantly shorter time to standard therapy failure than MTAP wild-type tumors (median 380.0 versus 567.0 days, hazard ratio 1.34, 95% CI 1.30-1.38, P < 0.0001). Furthermore, the overall survival of the MTAP-deleted group was significantly shorter than that of the MTAP wild-type group in the pan-cancer cohort of TCGA dataset (Figure 1D, median 26.7 versus 93.0 months, hazard ratio 2.36, 95% CI 2.14-2.61, P < 0.0001). We also analyzed time to standard therapy failure specifically in pancreatic cancers, which has the largest number of registered patients in the C-CAT database and is also one of the cancers with the poorest prognosis. Our results show that even within pancreatic cancer alone, MTAP-deleted tumors have significantly worse outcomes compared with wild-type tumors (Supplementary Figure S1, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2025.104535). This suggests that, beyond the cancer type distribution, the inherent characteristics of MTAP-deleted tumors themselves may contribute to the worse prognosis.

Tissue distribution of MTAP-deleted cancers

Given that the cancer type was identified as a significant predictor of MTAP deletion (Figure 1B), we further investigated the proportion of MTAP-deleted tumors across different cancer types. Figure 2A displays the MTAP deletion rates in various cancers, as derived from the C-CAT dataset. Notably, pleural (33.1%), bladder/urinary tract (23.8%), brain (19.0%), pancreatic (18.4%), skin (18.4%), thymus (15.7%), biliary tract (15.6%), and lung (14.3%) tumors exhibited higher proportions of MTAP deletion, whereas it was rare in prostate (1.2%), eye (1.2%), bowel (1.7%), testicular (3.3%), cervical (3.6%), uterine (4.0%), ovary/fallopian tube (4.3%), and breast (4.9%) cancers. We extended this analysis to include all cases (incorporating those analyzed by liquid CGP) and observed a similar distribution of MTAP deletion across cancer types (Supplementary Figure S2, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2025.104535). In addition, analysis of TCGA data showed a similar trend: higher MTAP deletion rates in the pleural (30.5%), bladder/urinary tract (26.1%), brain (23.7%), and pancreatic (22.9%) tumors (Figure 2B). In GENIE data, brain (21.3%), pleural (20.0%), bladder/urinary tract (17.0%), and pancreatic (10.4%) tumors exhibited higher proportions of MTAP deletion (Figure 2C).

Association of MTAP deletion with CDKN2A/B status across cancer types

MTAP is located in close proximity to the CDKN2A/B loci (9p21). To explore this relationship, we examined the proportion of MTAP deletions in cases with and without CDKN2A or CDKN2B deletions across cancer types in the C-CAT dataset. Our analysis revealed that while neither CDKN2A nor CDKN2B deletion alone is sufficient to guarantee MTAP deletion, their loss is an almost necessary condition for the occurrence of MTAP deletion (Figure 3). This trend was confirmed when analyzing the complete C-CAT dataset including liquid CGP cases, the TCGA dataset, and the GENIE dataset (Supplementary Figures S3-S5, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2025.104535).

Molecular landscape of MTAP-deleted cancers in the C-CAT dataset

To explore the distinct molecular features of MTAP-deleted cancers, we conducted a comprehensive co-mutation analysis. Given that CDKN2A/B are frequently co-deleted with MTAP, we excluded them from our analysis to focus on other potential molecular associations. Several significant co-mutation patterns were observed in the pan-cancer cohort (Figure 4A, Supplementary Table S3, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2025.104535). MTAP deletion was positively associated with mutations in TERT, NFE2L2, and NF2, while negative associations were noted with APC, RB1, and CTNNB1 mutations.

To account for potential differences in molecular backgrounds across cancer types, we also analyzed the co-mutation patterns within specific cancer types. Given the relevance of ongoing therapeutic trials for MTAP-deleted tumors, we focused on pancreatic, lung, and biliary tract cancers, which were the top three malignancies included in the first-in-human phase I clinical trials of AMG 193, an MTA-cooperative PRMT5 inhibitor. A comparison of MTAP-deleted pancreatic cancers with MTAP wild-type cancers revealed positive associations with KRAS, RNF43, and SPEN mutations (Figure 4B, Supplementary Table S4, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2025.104535). Conversely, MTAP deletion in pancreatic cancer was negatively associated with mutations in RB1 and MEN1. In lung cancers, NSD2 and MKNK1 mutations were more frequently observed in MTAP-deleted tumors, whereas RB1 and PTEN mutations were negatively associated with MTAP deletion (Figure 4C, Supplementary Table S5, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2025.104535). TP53 mutations also showed a significant inverse association with MTAP deletion (odds ratio 0.691). For biliary tract cancers, MTAP deletion was positively associated with mutations in the LTK, KEL, and RICTOR genes, whereas it was negatively associated with mutations in RB1 and PBRM1 (Figure 4D, Supplementary Table S6, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2025.104535).

Detailed analysis and validation of co-mutations and mutually exclusive mutations of MTAP deletion using external cohorts

Building upon the co-mutation findings from a comprehensive analysis of the C-CAT dataset, we further examined specific co-mutations and mutually exclusive mutations of MTAP deletion and assessed their generalizability using TCGA and GENIE data. A positive association between MTAP deletion and KRAS mutations was identified in the C-CAT pancreatic cancer dataset (Figure 4B and E), and we confirmed a consistent positive association when we restricted our analysis to KRAS activating mutations G12, G13, Q61, K117, and A146 (Supplementary Figure S6, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2025.104535). A similar analysis in the TCGA and GENIE pancreatic cancer datasets also showed this association (Figure 4F and G).

For RB1, our C-CAT pan-cancer analysis, along with subset analyses of pancreatic, lung, and biliary tract cancers, demonstrated a significant negative association with MTAP deletion (Figure 4A-D and H). While RB1 mutations were rare in pancreatic and biliary tract cases in TCGA and GENIE (both with mutation rates <5%), pan-cancer and lung cancer data from TCGA and GENIE confirmed the negative association between MTAP deletion and RB1 mutations (Figure 4I and J). For lung cancers, this trend extended to TP53, as TP53-mutated tumors showed a significantly lower frequency of MTAP deletion than TP53 wild-type tumors (Figure 4C). Given that both RB1 and TP53 mutations are commonly seen in small-cell lung cancer (SCLC), we further analyzed MTAP deletion across lung cancer subtypes. MTAP deletion was exceptionally rare in SCLC, whereas it was present in comparable proportions in adenocarcinoma and squamous-cell carcinoma (Figure 4K). Considering the proportion of druggable driver mutations in lung adenocarcinoma, we also evaluated the association between MTAP deletion and common driver gene alterations, as companion diagnostic tests are often conducted before CGP. Data from the C-CAT database provided information on the results of companion diagnostic tests for EGFR, ALK, ROS1, and BRAF mutations/translocations before CGP. Our findings showed that MTAP deletion was similarly frequent or slightly more prevalent in cases with EGFR, ALK, and ROS1 mutations/translocations than in those without these alterations (Figure 4L).

Discussion

In the present study, we leveraged the extensive C-CAT database, one of the largest CGP datasets with linked clinical information, to comprehensively characterize the clinical and molecular profiles of MTAP-deleted tumors across cancer types. This approach enabled us to identify unique clinical and molecular features associated with MTAP deletion, which we subsequently validated using TCGA and GENIE data to confirm the generalizability of our findings.

Our analysis incorporated a machine learning-based prediction model that used clinical data accessible before CGP testing as inputs to predict MTAP deletion. Using explainable artificial intelligence techniques, we identified the cancer type, age, sex, choice of CGP panel, and interval from the biopsy and cancer diagnosis to CGP as key predictors of MTAP deletion. It should be noted that CGP is covered by the Japanese national health insurance only for advanced solid tumors in patients who have completed or will soon complete standard therapies. Therefore, a short interval between the diagnosis and CGP represents not only rapid progression of MTAP-deleted tumors but also strong resistance to standard chemotherapy. In fact, our analysis showed that MTAP-deleted tumors had a significantly shorter time to standard therapy failure and shorter overall survival than MTAP wild-type tumors. These findings highlight the urgent need for accelerated clinical development of PRMT5 inhibitors for patients with MTAP-deleted tumors.

Our study also revealed that pancreatic, lung, biliary tract, pleural, bladder/urinary tract, and brain tumors had a high frequency of MTAP deletion, consistent across the C-CAT, TCGA, and GENIE datasets. These results suggest that the tissue distribution of MTAP-deleted tumors is not significantly influenced by factors such as race or ethnicity, highlighting the broad applicability of therapeutic strategies targeting MTAP deletion across different demographic groups. The frequent co-deletion of MTAP with CDKN2A/B loci was also confirmed across the three datasets, consistent with previous studies. This correlation is clinically significant, as some PRMT5 inhibitor trials have included CDKN2A deletion as an inclusion criterion. Importantly, we found that CDKN2A or CDKN2B deletion is nearly necessary, although not sufficient, for MTAP deletion, suggesting that the driving activity of MTAP deletion is weaker than that of CDKN2A/B deletion.

Our analysis revealed a robust positive association between MTAP deletion and activating KRAS mutation in pancreatic cancer. Although few studies have explored the biological interplay between MTAP deletion and KRAS activation in pancreatic cancer, previous reports suggest that methylation of specific amino acids enhances KRAS degradation and that PRMT5 and KRAS inhibitors synergistically suppress the growth of MTAP-deleted tumors. Investigating the cooperative mechanisms between MTAP deletion and KRAS activation is a promising avenue for future research.

We also identified a significant negative association between MTAP deletion and RB1 mutations, observed both in the pan-cancer cohort and in specific cancers, such as pancreatic, lung, and biliary tract cancers, and confirmed this association in the C-CAT, TCGA, and GENIE datasets. Although the relationship between MTAP and RB1 loss is not yet biologically defined, previous research has shown a mutual exclusivity between CDKN2A loss and RB1 mutations, which may underlie this observed negative association. Interestingly, our study showed that SCLC, known for high RB1 and TP53 mutation rates, had notably low rates of MTAP deletion, suggesting a potential biological link between MTAP and RB1 that warrants further investigation.

In lung adenocarcinoma, known driver mutations, such as EGFR, ALK, ROS1, and BRAF, are typically mutually exclusive. We showed that MTAP deletion rates were similar or even slightly higher in cases with known EGFR, ALK, or ROS1 mutations/translocations. This finding indicates that MTAP deletion is not mutually exclusive with these driver alterations, suggesting that PRMT5 inhibitors could potentially benefit patients with known driver mutations in lung adenocarcinoma. This finding underscores the value of screening for MTAP deletion in patients with known driver mutations, further expanding the therapeutic relevance of PRMT5 inhibition in precision oncology.

Several limitations associated with the present study warrant mention. Because this study analyzed the C-CAT database retrospectively, some clinically important features, such as the results of companion diagnostic tests, have missing values. In addition, the distribution of patients registered in the C-CAT database differs from the total population diagnosed with cancer, as patients in whom druggable driver mutations have been identified by cancer type-specific small companion diagnostic tests may not undergo CGP. Patients who were unable to receive additional treatments after standard therapy owing to a poor performance status were also excluded.

In conclusion, our study clarified the clinical and molecular landscape of MTAP-deleted tumors, providing key insights that could optimize patient selection for PRMT5 inhibitor therapies in precision oncology. PRMT5 inhibition represents a novel synthetic lethal strategy that exploits the unique vulnerability of MTAP-deleted tumor cells. As of February 2025, two PRMT5 inhibitors, AMG193 and AZD3470, are in clinical trials according to the C-CAT database. Encouraging early results from clinical trials suggest that PRMT5 inhibitors have the potential to deliver meaningful therapeutic benefits to patients with MTAP-deleted cancers, particularly those facing limited options due to the aggressive nature of these tumors. Future studies focusing on the biological interactions between MTAP deletion and co-occurring mutations will be essential for refining and expanding this promising therapeutic approach within the framework of precision oncology.
