---
pmid: '40451756'
doi: 10.1002/anie.202507765
pmcid: ''
title: Activatable Fluorescence/Photoacoustic Macromolecular Probe for Imaging of
  Tumor-Associated Natural Killer Cells.
authors:
- Feng Yanbin
- Hu Yuxuan
- Liu Jing
- Zhang Xianghan
- Zhang Yan
- Wang Zhongliang
- Pu Kanyi
journal: Angewandte Chemie (International ed. in English)
year: 2025
month: 7
volume: '64'
issue: '31'
pages: e202507765
is_oa: true
oa_status: bronze
oa_url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdfdirect/10.1002/anie.202507765
cited_by_count: 11
mesh_terms:
- Killer Cells, Natural
- Photoacoustic Techniques
- Animals
- Fluorescent Dyes
- Mice
- Humans
- Optical Imaging
- Neoplasms
- Fluorescence
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- TANK
drugs:
- BhCyNK
- BhCyS
- hemicyanine
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Photoacoustic and Ultrasonic Imaging
diseases_annotated:
- Tumor
- cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 4
icite_rcr: null
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Activatable Fluorescence/Photoacoustic Macromolecular Probe for Imaging of Tumor-Associated Natural Killer Cells.

## Abstract

Detection of tumor-associated natural killer cells (TANKs) is crucial for evaluating cancer immunotherapy because they are found to be associated with improved overall survival rate. However, existing analytical methods relying on tissue biopsy are invasive and static, restricting their capacity to deliver dynamic information. Herein, we report an activatable near-infrared fluorescence (NIRF)/photoacoustic (PA) macromolecular reporter (BhCyNK) for real-time imaging of TANKs. To optimize the PA performance, the fluorophore scaffold of BhCyNK is screened. Among four hemicyanine derivatives, BhCyS with the longest absorption maximum (∼800 nm) as well as the highest photothermal conversion efficiency (71.13%) and PA brightness is constructed into BhCyNK, which specifically triggers its NIRF signal (by 10-fold increase) and PA signal (by 8.3-fold increase) in the presence of a TANK-overexpressed protease. BhCyNK effectively distinguishes natural killer cells from other immune cells including T cells, neutrophils, and macrophages. The high specificity of BhCyNK enables real-time monitoring of TANKs population in the tumor of living mice amid cancer immunotherapies. The imaging results reveal that the increasing intratumoral signal of BhCyNK after combination immunotherapy correlates well with the increasing population of TANKs. Thus, this study not only reports a molecular strategy to develop efficient PA fluorophores but also provides an ideal tool for noninvasive monitoring of immune cells.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
