---
pmid: '40502368'
doi: 10.1016/j.mtbio.2025.101893
pmcid: PMC12152592
title: α-GalCer-LNP ehanced mRNA delivery and activates natural killer T cells for
  superior tumor immunotherapy.
authors:
- Zhang Kexin
- Xu Zhen
- Xiao Zexiu
- Cao Fei
- Wang Jing
- Xu Yuandong
- Ma Winson M J
- Long Sihui
- Zha Gao-Feng
journal: Materials today. Bio
year: 2025
month: 6
volume: '32'
issue: ''
pages: '101893'
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtbio.2025.101893
cited_by_count: 2
mesh_terms: []
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- nanoparticle
cancer_types:
- cervical
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes:
- CD11c
- CD1d
- IFN-gamma
drugs:
- G-LNP
- Lipid
- alpha-GalCer
- alpha-GalCer-LNP
- alpha-galactosylceramide
- glycolipid
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Immune Cell Function and Interaction
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- cervical carcinoma
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 1
icite_rcr: null
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
biology_processes:
- tme-stroma
resistant_states: []
pathway_targets: []
combination_evidence: designed-combination-preclinical
---

# α-GalCer-LNP ehanced mRNA delivery and activates natural killer T cells for superior tumor immunotherapy.

## Abstract

Lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) have emerged as a clinically validated platform for cancer immunotherapy; however, challenges remain in optimizing RNA delivery and promoting synergistic immune activation. To address these issues, we developed a modified LNP system that incorporates α-galactosylceramide (α-GalCer), a CD1d-binding glycolipid known to activate invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells. Through structural optimization, we created the α-GalCer-LNP (G-LNP), which offers three primary advantages over conventional four-component LNPs: (1) enhanced mRNA transfection efficiency due to improved endosomal/lysosomal escape, (2) increased capacity for in vivo DC transfection, leading to robust activation of tumor-specific CD8+ T cells via MHC-I and iNKT cells via the CD1d pathway, and (3) reprogramming of the tumor microenvironment, resulting in a 1.5-fold increase in iNKT cell infiltration and sustained elevation of IFN-γ (>24 h) in lymph nodes. In a TC-1 cervical carcinoma model, G-LNP induced complete tumor regression in 100 % of treated mice (compared to 42.85 % for standard LNP) and provided long-term protection against tumor rechallenge (lasting >100 days). Mechanistic studies showed that G-LNP preferentially targets CD11c+ DC in the lymph nodes, facilitating coordinated antigen presentation and innate immune activation. This five-component engineering strategy establishes a versatile platform to enhance the functionality of LNPs for the development of next-generation cancer vaccines.

## Full Text

α-GalCer-LNP ehanced mRNA delivery and activates natural killer T cells for superior tumor immunotherapy

Lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) have emerged as a clinically validated platform for cancer immunotherapy; however, challenges remain in optimizing RNA delivery and promoting synergistic immune activation. To address these issues, we developed a modified LNP system that incorporates α-galactosylceramide (α-GalCer), a CD1d-binding glycolipid known to activate invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells. Through structural optimization, we created the α-GalCer-LNP (G-LNP), which offers three primary advantages over conventional four-component LNPs: (1) enhanced mRNA transfection efficiency due to improved endosomal/lysosomal escape, (2) increased capacity for in vivo DC transfection, leading to robust activation of tumor-specific CD8+ T cells via MHC-I and iNKT cells via the CD1d pathway, and (3) reprogramming of the tumor microenvironment, resulting in a 1.5-fold increase in iNKT cell infiltration and sustained elevation of IFN-γ (>24 h) in lymph nodes. In a TC-1 cervical carcinoma model, G-LNP induced complete tumor regression in 100 % of treated mice (compared to 42.85 % for standard LNP) and provided long-term protection against tumor rechallenge (lasting >100 days). Mechanistic studies showed that G-LNP preferentially targets CD11c+ DC in the lymph nodes, facilitating coordinated antigen presentation and innate immune activation. This five-component engineering strategy establishes a versatile platform to enhance the functionality of LNPs for the development of next-generation cancer vaccines.

Graphical abstract

Introduction

The emergence of mRNA therapeutics has significantly advanced the field of vaccinology, as demonstrated by the clinical success of lipid nanoparticle (LNP)-based COVID-19 vaccines. However, applying this success to cancer immunotherapy necessitates overcoming three key challenges: (1) inefficient delivery to antigen-presenting cells (APCs), (2) inadequate activation of both adaptive and innate immune responses, and (3) immunosuppressive tumor microenvironments. While current LNP optimization strategies often focus on lipid structure modifications and surface alterations such as SORT molecules, few address the critical requirement for synchronized immune activation.

Invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells represent a potent but underutilized immune axis. These antigen-reactive lymphocytes bridge innate and adaptive immunity by rapidly secreting IFN-γ and IL-4 upon activation by dendritic cells (DCs) or cytotoxic T lymphocytes. α-Galactosylceramide (α-GalCer), a prototype CD1d-restricted glycolipid, uniquely activates iNKT cells through CD1d-mediated antigen presentation. Despite promising preclinical findings, the clinical application of α-GalCer has been hindered by limitations such as poor pharmacokinetics (half-life <6 h), off-target activation, and inadequate coupling of antigen presentation with innate immune stimulation.

We propose that the incorporation of α-GalCer as the fifth component in LNP can enhance mRNA delivery through three distinct mechanisms, while simultaneously coordinating anti-tumor immune responses: (1) enhancing the ability of LNPs to transfect DC in vivo, (2) CD1d-dependent activation of iNKT cells to prime DCs and overcome immune tolerance, and (3) synergistic activation of tumor-specific CD8+ T cells and innate immune effectors. This approach diverges from previous strategies using free α-GalCer or adoptive cell transfer, represents a novel, self-adjuvating platform that combines the advantages of LNPs with α-GalCer to improve both antigen delivery and immune activation in cancer immunotherapy (Fig. Scheme 1).

Methods

LNP synthesis

An organic phase was prepared by solubilising a mixture of the synthesised cationic lipid, 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DSPC) (Avanti), cholesterol (Avanti), 1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-[methoxy(polyethylene glycol)-2000] (DMG-PEG2000) (Avanti), and α-galactosylceramide (α-GalCer, MedChem Express) with ethanol at a molar ratio. The organic phase of the A3 LNP comprised of E12CA1A3/distearoylphosphatidylcholine (DSPC)/cholesterol/DMG-PEG2000 at a ratio of 47.5/10/41/1.5 (mol%). The organic phase of G-LNPs and empty LNP (Vector) comprised of E12CA1A3/DSPC/cholesterol/DMG-PEG2000/α-GalCer at a ratio of 47.5/10/41/1.5/1.45 (mol%). The organic phase of MC3 LNP comprised of MC3/DSPC/cholesterol/DMG-PEG2000 at a ratio of 47.5/10/41/1.5 (mol%). Vortexed for 5 min, sonicated (Branson 3800) for 10 min at 25 °C. The aqueous phase was 25 mM citrate buffer (pH 4.0 ± 0.1) prepared by mixing 0.2 M citric acid (Aladdin C116166) and 0.2 M trisodium citrate (Aladdin S111166) with pH calibrated by Mettler Toledo FE28. mRNA(1 mg mL−1 in citrate buffer), encoding firefly luciferase (mFluc), enhanced green fluorescent protein (mEGFP), ovalbumin (mOVA), and mE7, stored at −80 °C, thawed on ice for 30 min before use. The mRNA sequences of OVA and E7 are shown in Table S1. All mRNAs were stored at −80 °C and thawed on ice before use. The ethanol and aqueous phases were mixed at a ratio of 3:1 in a microfluidic chip device (INano™E machine MicroNano) using a syringe pump with an overall flow rate of 12 mL min−1 and the lipid/mRNA N/P molar ratio of 6.5:1 (calculated via ionizable lipid amine-to-mRNA phosphate molar ratio), as previously described. Subsequently, the solution was diafiltrated twice against PBS-Tris (PBS-Tris (pH 7.5: 10 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl) with 0.01 % (v/v) AVT) by Amicon® Ultra-15 centrifugal filters (BERCK, UFC910024). LNPs stored at 4 °C under argon atmosphere to prevent oxidation. Each batch tested for size (95 ± 5 nm), PDI (<0.1), and EE (>90 %) via DLS/RiboGreen.

Lipid fusion by FRET assay

The dissociation and fusion efficiency of LNPs were assessed using a black 96-well plate and a microplate reader with fluorescence measurement at Ex/Em = 465/520 nm. For the dissociation assay, LNPs (A1A3, A1A3-Galcer) incorporating the FRET probes NBD-PE and Rho-PE were prepared with a lipid composition of ionizable lipid: DSPC: cholesterol: DMG-PEG2000: NBD-PE: Rho-PE = 47.5:10:41:1.5:1:1 or ionizable lipid: DSPC: cholesterol: DMG-PEG2000: α-GalCer: NBD-PE: Rho-PE = 47.5:10:41:1.5:1.45:1:1 at a final concentration of 1 mM. Anionic lipid membranes simulating the endosomal environment were prepared with a composition of DOPS:DOPC:DOPE = 25:25:50 and a total lipid concentration of 10 mM. PBS (pH 5.5) was added to the 96-well plate (100 μL/well), followed by 1 μL of LNPs and 1 μL of simulated endosomal anionic lipid membranes per well. After incubation at 37 °C for different time points, fluorescence intensity (F) was measured. LNPs dissolved in PBS were used as the negative control (Fmin), while LNPs treated with 2 % Triton X-100 served as the positive control (Fmax). The dissociation efficiency of LNPs (%) was calculated as (F - Fmin)/(Fmax - Fmin) × 100 %. For the fusion assay, LNPs were prepared with a lipid composition of ionizable lipid: DSPC: cholesterol: DMG-PEG2000 = 47.5:10:41:1.5 or ionizable lipid: DSPC: cholesterol: DMG-PEG2000: α-GalCer = 47.5:10:41:1.5:1.45 at a final concentration of 1 mM. The anionic lipid membranes mimicking the endosome were composed of DOPS:DOPC:DOPE:NBD-PE:Rho-PE = 25:25:48:1:1, with a total lipid concentration of 10 mM. The experimental procedures were the same as those in the dissociation assay. The fusion efficiency of LNPs (%) was calculated as (F - Fmin)/(Fmax - Fmin) × 100 %. Additionally, fluorescence intensity was measured at different time points (0 min, 10 min, 20 min, 30 min, 45 min, 60 min) to monitor time-dependent changes.

BMDCs activation and antigen presentation analysis

BMDCs (2 × 104 cells/well) were seeded in 96-well plates and then incubated with 0.5 μg mOVA-loaded LNPs or equi-lipid controls (MC3 LNP as positive control) in complete medium (24 h, 37 °C, 5 % CO2). Cells were harvested, washed with FACS buffer (10 % FBS/PBS), and blocked with anti-CD16/32 (4 °C, 10 min). Surface markers were stained for 30 min on ice using fluorophore-conjugated antibodies: CD45, CD11c, CD40, CD69, CD86, OX40L, MHCII, CD1d-α-GalCer complex, and PE-anti-SIINFEKL/H-2Kb (clone 24-D1, eBioscience). For intracellular/nuclear targets, Brefeldin A (BioLegend, 420601) was added 20 h post-treatment. Activation status and antigen presentation were quantified by flow cytometry using parent cell gating strategies. The analysis of intracellular and intranuclear factors is described in Supplementary Fig.S8.

Tumor immunotherapy experiment

TC-1 tumor models were established by subcutaneous injection of 5 × 105 cells into the right dorsum of C57BL/6J mice. Immunization (PBS, Vector, 5 μg mE7 G-LNP, or 5 μg mE7 A3 LNP) commenced when tumors reached <100 mm3 (volume = 0.5 × length × width2). Tumor dimensions were measured biweekly using digital calipers. Animals were humanely euthanized at either: 1) Endpoint criteria: Tumor volume ≥1500 mm3, 2) Day 18: For immune profiling (tumors/spleens/lymph nodes). Tumor tissues were processed for: 1) Immunofluorescence: 4 % paraformaldehyde fixation, 2) Immune cell isolation and lymphocyte enrichment for flow cytometry: Collagenase IV (0.2 mg mL−1)/DNase I (20 μg mL−1) digestion (Sigma) and murine isolation kit (DRKEWE 721101/X).

Flow cytometry

For flow cytometry, cells were blocked with anti-CD16/32 and surface-stained with fluorophore-conjugated antibodies (30 min, ice). Intracellular (e.g., IFN-γ) and intranuclear markers (e.g., PLZF) were detected using Cyto-Fast Fix/Perm (BioLegend 750000135) and FoxP3 Fix/Perm (BioLegend 421403) kits, respectively, after surface staining, followed by intracellular/intranuclear antibody incubation (30 min). Antibody details are listed in Supplementary Table S2. Data were acquired on a Beckman Cytoflex S cytometer and analysed with FlowJo v10.8.1.

Statistical analysis

Cell transfection curves were analysed using ordinary two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) to compare column means (primary column effects), followed by Tukey's multiple comparison test. Cellular uptake curves were analysed using ordinary two-way ANOVA to compare cell means, regardless of rows and columns, with Tukey's multiple comparison test of the narrative results. Kaplan-Meier simple survival analysis was used to analyse survival. Statistical differences were analysed using ordinary one-way ANOVA when normality and log-normality tests were performed. Alternatively, the Brown-Forsythe and Welch ANOVA tests were used. Tukey's multiple comparison test with individual variance was used for each comparison. Statistical analyses were performed using the Microsoft Excel and GraphPad Prism, version 9.3.0. The LNP stability data are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation (SD). Additional data are expressed as the mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). Differences were considered significant at P < 0.05 (∗P < 0.05, ∗∗P < 0.01, ∗∗∗P < 0.001, and ∗∗∗∗P < 0.0001).

Results

Formulation and characterisation of G-LNP

Building on our previously established E12CA1A3 LNP (A3 LNP) platform for efficient mRNA delivery and antitumor immunity, we developed an advanced lipid nanoparticle (G-LNP) by integrating α-GalCer—a potent iNKT cell agonist, as a fifth functional component. The inclusion of α-GalCer serves a dual function: it modifies the surface properties of the LNPs and acts as an immunostimulant. Malvern, capillary electrophoresis, and cryo-electron microscopy analyses indicated that the addition of α-GalCer did not alter the particle size, providing a basis for subsequent comparisons of the efficacy between the two formulations (Fig. 1A, Fig. S1A-C, Fig. S2). The mFluc-loaded G-LNPs were precisely characterized, showing a near-neutral ζ-potential of +4.5 mV, which balances colloidal stability while minimizing nonspecific cellular interactions; Additionally, the mRNA encapsulation efficiency was 91.94 %, with 84.2 % of the mRNA remaining intact (Fig. 1A). The functional pKa of 6.482 facilitates endosomal escape and efficient cytoplasmic cargo release (Fig. 1A, Fig. S3). Furthermore, G-LNPs exhibited stability for up to 30 days when stored at 4 °C (Fig. 1B). High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) quantification confirmed the precise incorporation of α-GalCer (1.46 % vs. theoretical 1.45 %), validating formulation accuracy (Fig. 1C, Fig. S4). In summary, these results demonstrate the superior performance of G-LNP as an mRNA delivery vehicle.

mRNA delivery capacity and endosomal escape of G-LNP

The transfection efficiency of G-LNP was evaluated utilizing mFluc-mRNA as a reporter. In vitro assessments across multiple cell lines, including HEK293T, HeLa, and DC2.4, demonstrated that G-LNP exhibited superior transfection efficiency compared to A3 LNP (Fig. 2A, Fig. S5). The mFluc reporter activity confirmed the unimpaired co-delivery capability of α-GalCer and mRNA payloads within these systems. Due to the addition of α-GalCer, the biodistribution of the LNPs in vivo was reevaluated. In vivo intramuscular administration of mFluc G-LNP generated localized bioluminescence signals at injection sites (6 h post-dose) with 2-fold higher radiance versus A3 and MC3 LNP controls (Fig. 1D). Ex vivo bioluminescence imaging of organs showed mFluc expression predominantly in the draining lymph nodes (dLNs) (Fig. 1E, Fig. S6).

To investigate the higher transfection efficiency of G-LNP, we examined both cellular uptake and lysosomal escape. Uptake assays with BMDCs and DC2.4 cells revealed that nearly 100 % of the cells were positive for Cy5-LNP, indicating similar uptake capacities for both G-LNP and conventional LNPs (Fig. 2B, Fig. S7). To visually assess lysosomal escape, confocal imaging was performed using a Nikon AX microscope on G-LNP treated for 3, 5, and 8 h. Cy5-mRNA (red) encapsulated in G-LNP partially escaped the endosomes/lysosomes (green) after 3 h and was almost fully translocated to the cytoplasm by 8 h (Fig. 2C). To contrast the differences between A3-LNP and G-LNP in promoting mRNA lysosomal escape, we conducted fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) assays. The results indicated that G-LNP significantly facilitated accelerated mRNA escape from lysosomes (Fig. 2D and E). Collectively, these data demonstrate that G-LNP effectively escape endosomes/lysosomes and support efficient mRNA delivery.

G-LNP induced superior antigen presentation and functional activation of BMDCs

APCs process and present tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) or tumor-specific antigens (TSAs) to CD8+ T cells via MHC-I. To evaluate antigen presentation, we incubated BMDCs with mOVA G-LNP for 24 h. The G-LNP group exhibited twice the number of H-2kb257-264 cells compared to the A3 LNP group (Fig. 3A, Fig. S8). The CD1d-α-GalCer complex is recognized by the T-cell receptor (TCR) on iNKT cells through a non-classical MHC pathway, triggering iNKT cell activation. About 70 % of BMDCs formed the α-GalCer-CD1d complex when treated with G-LNP, outperforming free α-GalCer (Fig. 3B, Fig. S9 and S10A). CD8+ T cell activation requires co-stimulatory signals and cytokines from DCs or other immune cells beyond TCR signaling. Key activation markers (CD40, CD69, CD80, CD86, OX40L, MHC-II) were significantly upregulated in BMDCs co-incubated with mOVA G-LNP versus PBS controls. (Fig. 3C–D, Fig. S10B). Interleukin-12 (IL-12) plays a crucial role in innate and adaptive anti-tumor immune responses by activating IFN-γ production in T and NK lymphocytes. G-LNP-treated BMDCs expressed higher levels of IL-12 than that of the A3 LNP group (Fig. 3E, Fig. S10C). Additionally, Ki67 analysis confirmed an upregulation of cell proliferation in the G-LNP group (Fig. 3F, Fig. S10D). Overall, these results demonstrate that G-LNP significantly enhance antigen presentation and BMDCs activation, critical for priming T cell responses in anti-tumor immunity.

G-LNP stimulated robust antigen-specific CD8+ T and NKT immune responses In vivo

The targeting of G-LNP in mouse immune cells after intramuscular injection is not clear. To address this, we first examined the distribution of G-LNP in lymph nodes and spleen using flow cytometry. The results demonstrated that 24 h after intramuscular injection of mEGFP LNP, G-LNP showed a greater ability to target DCs in lymphoid organs compared to A3 LNP (Fig. 4A, Fig. S11). Notably, in the G-LNP-treated group, approximately 6 % of DCs in the spleen were observed to present the α-GalCer-CD1d complex (Fig. 4B).

To further evaluate the immunostimulatory effects of G-LNP in vivo, healthy C57BL/6 mice were vaccinated with OVA mRNA encapsulated in different LNP formulations (Fig. 4C, Fig. S12). Flow cytometry analysis showed that CD40 expression, a marker of DC activation, was upregulated in both the G-LNP and A3 LNP groups compared to the PBS group (Fig. 4D). Importantly, G-LNP-treated mice exhibited a two-fold increase in the number of OVA-specific CD8+ T cells within lymph nodes and spleen (Fig. 4E). Additionally, a significant increase in NKT and memory T cells and was observed in the spleen (Fig. 4F–G, Fig. S13). Analysis of functional immune markers revealed elevated levels of IFN-γ and Granzyme B in CD8+ T cells from the G-LNP group (Fig. 4H). The transcription factor PLZF, essential for iNKT cell effector differentiation, was upregulated 2-3-fold in the G-LNP group compared to the A3 LNP group (Fig. 4I). These results indicate that G-LNP elicit robust cellular immune responses and enhance NKT and CD8+ T cell activation.

E7-G-LNP initiated the therapeutic efficacy in TC-1 tumor model

The therapeutic efficacy of G-LNP was evaluated using the TC-1 cervical carcinoma mouse model. In the G-LNP-treated group, 100 % of mice achieved a complete response (CR), while the A3 LNP group showed a survival rate of approximately 50 % (Fig. 5A). Both A3 and G-LNP completely eliminated the tumor on day 21 following tumor cell inoculation, four days after the last LNP administration; however, while tumors in the A3 LNP group recurred rapidly, those in the G-LNP group did not recur for over three months (Fig. 5B–C, Fig. S14A). In addition, mice in all treatment groups showed no significant weight loss during the treatment period (Fig. S14B). Above all, mE7 G-LNP showed the best therapeutic effect in the TC-1 model.

We then took a new batch of mice for TC-1 tumor inoculation, administered the treatment on days 7 and 12, and sacrificed the mice on day 16 (Fig. 5D, Fig. S15A–B). Flow cytometry was used to investigate the reasons why G-LNP exhibited better therapeutic efficacy. G-LNP-treated mice exhibited a two-fold increase in NK and NKT cell numbers in peripheral blood, which correlated with tumor shrinkage (Fig. 5E and F). A higher number of CD8+ T and NKT cells were found in the spleen and tumor microenvironment (TME) of G-LNP-treated mice compared to those treated with A3 LNP (Fig. 5G–I). The functional tumor-killing cytokine IFN-γ was significantly upregulated in NKT, NK, and CD8+ T cells from the lymph nodes of G-LNP-treated mice (Fig. 5J–L). Furthermore, in G-LNP group, the expression of PD-1 on CD8+ T cells was not up-regulated, while the proportion of PD-1 on NKT cells was up-regulated (Fig. S15C–E). Immunofluorescence staining confirmed the presence of more CD8+ T and NKT cells at the tumor site following G-LNP treatment (Fig. S15F). In conclusion, G-LNP carrying mRNA cargo demonstrated potent anti-tumor efficacy by stimulating both CD8+ T cell and NKT cell responses.

G-LNP demonstrated satisfactory safety both In vitro and In vivo

Prior research has established that α-GalCer is biocompatible and safe as an NKT cell ligand. In this study, both G-LNP and A3 LNP-treated BMDCs exhibited over 80 % cell viability at concentrations up to 3 μg mRNA mL−1 LNP (Fig. 6A). BMDCs from all treatment groups demonstrated no apoptosis at conventional doses (0.5 μg mRNA mL−1), neither early (ANNEXIN-V+ 7-AAD-) nor late apoptosis (ANNEXIN-V+ 7-AAD+) (Fig. 6B). For acute toxicity assessment, E7 LNP were administered intramuscularly to mice at four times the standard dose (Fig. 6C). Histological examination of primary organs via H&E staining and blood biochemical analyses for hepatorenal function revealed no significant structural changes (Fig. 6D) or alterations in alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), blood urea nitrogen (BUN), or creatinine (CREA) levels (Fig. 6E). These findings support the conclusion that the G-LNP formulation is safe for both in vitro and in vivo applications.

Discussion

The development of mRNA-LNP vaccines has marked a significant breakthrough in both infectious disease and cancer immunotherapy, exemplified by the clinical success of COVID-19 vaccines and emerging cancer vaccine candidates like BNT113 and mRNA-4157/V940. However, the clinical application of mRNA cancer vaccines remains hindered by challenges in optimizing antigen presentation and fostering efficient immune system activation. Building on our prior work with the A3 LNP platform, we engineered G-LNP by incorporating α-GalCer, a potent CD1d-restricted iNKT cell agonist, into the LNP system. This modification addresses two key limitations of conventional LNP: (1) poor endosomal escape and (2) inadequate activation of innate immunity.

Current research efforts have focused on incorporating α-GalCer into LNPs to enhance the ability of mRNA drugs to activate the immune system in mice. However, these studies have typically used α-GalCer merely as an adjuvant, with minimal content added. In our work, we attempted to integrate α-GalCer as a fifth component of the LNP formulation. We found that in A1A3 LNPs, α-GalCer can be included at up to 1.45 mol% without causing significant changes in particle size or polydispersity index (PDI). Based on this finding, we named this specific LNP formulation G-LNP and conducted a series of studies to evaluate its properties and efficacy.

G-LNP demonstrated a 2.1-fold improvement in mRNA delivery efficiency in vivo, which can be attributed to its optimized protonation properties (pKa = 6.48) and enhanced lysosomal escape kinetics. Unlike free α-GalCer, G-LNP co-delivered α-GalCer and mRNA to CD11c+ DCs in lymphoid organs, facilitating dual antigen presentation through MHC-I (for CD8+ T cells) and CD1d (for iNKT cells) pathways. This dual engagement led to a synergistic immune response, with G-LNP inducing 2.3-fold more OVA-specific CD8+ T cells and 3.1-fold more splenic iNKT cells than A3 LNP. Moreover, iNKT cells in the G-LNP group showed a 2.5-fold increase in PLZF expression (a key regulator of effector cytokine production), enhancing overall immune activation.

In the TC-1 tumor model, G-LNP achieved a 100 % complete tumor regression rate and long-lasting memory (>90 days), while A3 LNP-treated mice experienced a 50 % relapse rate. This enhanced efficacy was attributed to G-LNP's ability to remodel the tumor microenvironment (TME), increasing intratumoral iNKT cells (3.8 % vs. 1.2 % for A3) and improving the CD8+ T/Treg ratio (5.2 vs. 2.1). iNKT cell activation also boosted NK cell cytotoxicity (2.1-fold peripheral expansion) and enhanced CD8+ T cell functionality (3.5-fold higher IFN-γ+ cells), overcoming common immune escape mechanisms such as MHC-I downregulation.

Although G-LNP shows significant promise, there remain areas for improvement. The immunosuppressive TME may require combinatorial strategies, such as PD-1 blockade, to overcome iNKT and CD8+ T cell exhaustion. Future studies should investigate the use of G-LNP in CD1d-high malignancies (e.g., lymphomas) and utilize single-cell transcriptomics to further characterize the functional states of iNKT cells.

Conclusion

We have developed G-LNP, a multifunctional mRNA-LNP platform that co-encapsulates α-GalCer to enhance both innate (iNKT) and adaptive (CD8+ T cell) immune responses. By improving lysosomal escape and enabling dual MHC-I/CD1d antigen presentation, G-LNP induced a stronger tumor-specific CD8+ T cell response and expanded iNKT populations, leading to durable tumor eradication in the TC-1 model. The modular nature of this platform allows for the incorporation of various payloads, such as tumor-specific antigens, cytokines, and checkpoint inhibitors, making it a promising candidate for combination immunotherapies. Future studies will investigate the potential of combining G-LNP with PD-1 inhibitors to counteract TME-induced immune exhaustion, particularly in CD1d-high malignancies.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Kexin Zhang: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Methodology, Data curation. Zhen Xu: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Investigation. Zexiu Xiao: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Data curation. Fei Cao: Visualization, Validation. Jing Wang: Methodology. Yuandong Xu: Methodology. Winson M.J. Ma: Supervision, Software. Sihui Long: Supervision, Conceptualization. Gao-Feng Zha: Supervision, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
