---
pmid: '40697518'
doi: 10.1016/j.cpt.2024.11.003
pmcid: PMC12277827
title: 'Circular RNA vaccines: Pioneering the next-gen cancer immunotherapy.'
authors:
- Das Uddalak
- Banerjee Soupayan
- Sarkar Meghna
- Muhammad L Fathah
- Soni Tanveen Kaur
- Saha Madhumita
- Pradhan Gayatri
- Chatterjee Bhaskarjyaa
journal: Cancer pathogenesis and therapy
year: 2025
month: 7
volume: '3'
issue: '4'
pages: 309-321
is_oa: true
oa_status: diamond
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpt.2024.11.003
cited_by_count: 15
mesh_terms: []
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Circular RNAs in diseases
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 6
icite_rcr: 0.8506956500897584
icite_percentile: 44.3
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
biology_processes: []
resistant_states: []
pathway_targets: []
---

# Circular RNA vaccines: Pioneering the next-gen cancer immunotherapy.

## Abstract

Circular ribonucleic acid (circRNA) vaccines have emerged as a revolutionary strategy in cancer immunotherapy, facilitating novel approaches to induce robust and durable immune responses. Unlike traditional linear messenger RNA (mRNA) vaccines, circRNAs exhibit exceptional stability, enhanced translational efficiency, and resistance to exonuclease degradation, making them ideal candidates for vaccine development. This review delved into the fundamental principles underlying circRNA biology, highlighting their unique structural advantages and translational potential. We examined recent advancements in circRNA vaccine design, focusing on their application in oncology. As the circRNA-based cancer vaccine is a relatively novel technology, findings from all the major studies describing its efficacy were discussed. We further investigated their combination with other immunotherapeutic modalities, such as immune checkpoint inhibitors and adoptive cell therapies, that ensure the maximal anticancer effects of circRNA vaccines. Large-scale manufacturing, immunogenicity optimization, delivery systems, and other challenges and future directions in this field were also discussed. This study aims to thoroughly analyze the state-of-the-art and potential future applications of circRNA vaccines in cancer immunotherapy, highlighting them as exciting possibilities for next-generation cancer therapies.

## Full Text

Circular RNA vaccines: Pioneering the next-gen cancer immunotherapy

Circular ribonucleic acid (circRNA) vaccines have emerged as a revolutionary strategy in cancer immunotherapy, facilitating novel approaches to induce robust and durable immune responses. Unlike traditional linear messenger RNA (mRNA) vaccines, circRNAs exhibit exceptional stability, enhanced translational efficiency, and resistance to exonuclease degradation, making them ideal candidates for vaccine development. This review delved into the fundamental principles underlying circRNA biology, highlighting their unique structural advantages and translational potential. We examined recent advancements in circRNA vaccine design, focusing on their application in oncology. As the circRNA-based cancer vaccine is a relatively novel technology, findings from all the major studies describing its efficacy were discussed. We further investigated their combination with other immunotherapeutic modalities, such as immune checkpoint inhibitors and adoptive cell therapies, that ensure the maximal anticancer effects of circRNA vaccines. Large-scale manufacturing, immunogenicity optimization, delivery systems, and other challenges and future directions in this field were also discussed. This study aims to thoroughly analyze the state-of-the-art and potential future applications of circRNA vaccines in cancer immunotherapy, highlighting them as exciting possibilities for next-generation cancer therapies.

Graphical abstract

Mechanism of action of circular RNA vaccines in cancer immunotherapy. In step 1, linear mRNA is transformed into covalently closed loops through ligation, thereby enhancing its stability and translational efficiency compared to linear mRNA, which possesses exonuclease-sensitive ends. This circularization not only optimizes RNA for higher expression levels but also reduces its immunogenicity, mitigating unwanted immune responses that typically degrade linear RNA. In step 2, the circRNA vaccine is administered intravenously. Delivery methods include LNPs, exosomes, or other nanocarriers; methods without carriers are also sometimes employed. The use of LNPs improves cellular uptake, shields the RNA from degradation, and promotes endosomal escape, enabling cytoplasmic release. In step 3, once internalized by the target cells, the circRNA is translated into tumor-specific antigenic proteins by ribosomes. These antigens are subsequently processed and presented on the cell surface by APCs, such as dendritic cells, thereby initiating the activation of adaptive immune pathways. Step 4 delineates the activation of the immune response, wherein these tumor antigens are identified by TCRs on cytotoxic T-cells, leading to a vigorous immune attack against cancer cells that present these antigens. Finally, step 5 underscores the potential for combination therapies, where circRNA vaccines, when combined with other cancer treatments like immune checkpoint inhibitors, radiosensitizers, or chemotherapeutic agents, amplify the overall anti-tumor immune response, thus enhancing the treatment's specificity and efficacy. The figure highlights the potential of circRNA vaccines in fostering a durable, antigen-specific immune memory, presenting a novel platform for personalized cancer therapy. APC: Antigen-presenting cell; circRNA: Circular ribonucleic acid; LNP: Lipid nanoparticle; mRNA: Messenger ribonucleic acid; TCR: T-cell receptor.

Highlights

Circular RNA (circRNA) cancer vaccines advance next-gen immunotherapy with enhanced stability and efficacy for precision oncology.

CircRNAs encode tumor antigens and adjuvants, enabling personalized vaccines to modulate heterogeneity and gene expression.

Novel delivery methods, like lipid nanoparticles and exosomes, improve circRNA vaccine efficacy.

Combining circRNA vaccines with therapies like T-cell receptor-engineered T-cell therapy enhances anti-cancer efficacy.

Introduction

In the field of cancer therapeutics, there is a continuous effort to develop effective immunotherapeutic strategies, motivated by the need to overcome the limitations of current treatment methods. Despite the considerable advancements made in the field of cancer treatment, conventional therapies such as chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) continue to face challenges in terms of limited effectiveness, adverse effects, and treatment resistance. ICIs are essential components of cancer vaccines; they enhance the effectiveness of vaccine-induced anti-tumor immunity, strengthen the immune response, and assist in countering the immune evasion of cancer cells. Although ICIs have transformed cancer treatment for some patients, a significant number are non-responsive or resistant, emphasizing the necessity for alternative strategies to enhance immune activation and overcome tumor immune evasion mechanisms.

Circular RNA (circRNA)-based cancer vaccines provide a promising solution, addressing these challenges by leveraging the stability and prolonged antigen expression made possible by the covalently closed-loop structures of circRNA. As illustrated in Table 1, numerous studies have investigated the potential of circRNA-based cancer vaccines, which can improve patient outcomes and facilitate the development of personalized cancer immunotherapy by overcoming the limitations of existing immunotherapy strategies. Although circRNA-based cancer vaccines exhibit advantageous characteristics, several barriers and research gaps need to be addressed to fully realize their potential. Critical questions remain about the optimal configuration of circRNA structures, the mechanisms that trigger immune responses, and the development of effective delivery systems. Moreover, extensive preclinical and clinical validation is essential to ensure the safety, efficacy, and practicality of circRNA-based vaccines for cancer.

Remarkable progress has been made in cancer immunotherapy development, particularly with the advent of ICIs and chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-T cell therapies. ICIs have transformed cancer treatment by enabling the immune system to target cancer cells more effectively, while CAR-T therapies have shown significant success in treating certain blood cancers. Additionally, cancer vaccines and adoptive cell transfer (ACT) techniques, such as tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) therapy, are promising areas of development. Supplementary Figure 1 provides a brief history of advancements in cancer immunotherapy, especially with respect to circRNA vaccines. However, the field faces several hurdles, including the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment (TME), manufacturing complexities, resistance mechanisms, and severe side effects. Overcoming these hurdles requires continuous research and innovation to enhance the efficacy and accessibility of immunotherapies, ultimately improving patient outcomes. The review provides an overview of circRNA vaccines in the context of cancer immunotherapy. It meticulously explores various facets, including the intricate design principles, diverse delivery modes, and the underlying mechanisms of immune activation. The latest research findings have been summarized to explore the state of cancer immunotherapy and reveal prospective pathways for future development to employ circRNA vaccines to battle cancer effectively.

Role of circRNA in cancer progression and therapeutic resistance

In the field of cancer therapeutics, the four main types of therapy are as follows: immune cell or tumor-derived, peptide-based, viral vector-based, and nucleic acid-based vaccines. Several neoantigen vaccines, including DNA, messenger RNA (mRNA), and synthetic long peptide (SLP)-based vaccines, are being developed. However, considering broader translational approaches, every other form of therapy is associated with flaws that require addressing before their clinical implementation. Therefore, more targeted, safe, and effective immunotherapy alternatives are being investigated while evaluating circRNA-based technology as a potential cancer therapeutics approach.

CircRNAs contribute to therapeutic resistance by modulating stress responses and enhancing cancer cell survival through mechanisms such as pro-survival signaling activation, drug metabolism alterations, and apoptosis evasion. For example (Circular RNA derived from CRIM1 (Cysteine Rich Transmembrane BMP Regulator 1) circCRIM1 promotes resistance by sequestering miR-422a (MicroRNA-422a), preventing its inhibitory effect on Forkhead Box C1 (FOXQ1), thereby inducing chemoresistance, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and metastasis in nasopharyngeal cancer. In triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), Circular RNA derived from HER2 (Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2) (circHER2) encodes the HER2-103 peptide, allowing therapy with pertuzumab, which reduces tumorigenicity due to sequence similarity with the HER2 Constitutive Region 1 (HER2 CR1) domain. Conversely, downregulation of circTADA2A-E6 (Circular RNA derived from ∗TADA2A (Transcriptional Adaptor 2A), specifically exon 6) and hsa_circ_0025202 in TNBC impairs tumor suppression by sponging miR-203a-3p (MicroRNA-203a-3p) and miR-182-5p (MicroRNA-182-5p), respectively, leading to decreased cancer cell proliferation and increased tamoxifen sensitivity. In liver cancer, circRNA-104718 and circβ-catenin are frequently upregulated, promoting tumor growth; circβ-catenin interacts with Gsk3β to create a unique β-catenin isoform that enhances Wnt signaling, cell invasion, and proliferation, while short hairpin RNA (shRNA) targeting this circRNA reduces tumor initiation and metastasis. CircTRIM33-12 (Circular RNA derived from Tripartite Motif Containing 33), downregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), acts as a tumor suppressor by sponging miR-191 (MicroRNA-191), inhibiting cell proliferation, migration, and invasion, with overexpression leading to reduced tumor growth and metastasis. In gastric cancer, circCACTIN (Circular RNA derived from CACTIN) is upregulated and associated with cancer progression by sponging miRNA-331-3p, facilitating proliferation, migration, and invasion, contributing to EMT; targeting this circRNA with small interfering RNA (siRNA) diminishes these malignant activities and tumor growth in vivo. Conversely, circPSMC3 (Circular RNA derived from ∗PSMC3) and circHuR (Circular RNA derived from Human Antigen R or ELAVL1) are downregulated in gastric cancer and exhibit antitumor properties. Circ0007534 functions as an endosomal sponge that competes with miR-625 (MicroRNA-625), reducing paclitaxel efficacy and increasing ZEB2 (Zinc Finger E-Box Binding Homeobox 2) expression, a key EMT regulator in endometrial cancer. In prostate cancer, enzalutamide significantly alters circRNA expression in drug-resistant cells, offering insights into drug-resistance mechanisms. Various circRNAs serve as oncogenes or tumor suppressors across different cancers. For instance, circAGO2 (Circular RNA derived from Argonaute RISC Catalytic Component 2) is upregulated in multiple cancer types, and after activation by the HuR (Human Antigen R (ELAVL1)) protein, promotes proliferation, invasion, and metastasis; targeting circAGO2 with shRNA or inhibiting its interaction with HuR reduces tumor growth. Furthermore, circRNAs interact with microRNAs (miRNAs), influencing functions such as chemoresistance and immune responses in cancer treatment. Notably, the FOXC1/miR-31-5p(MicroRNA-31-5p)/large tumor suppressor kinase 2 signaling pathway significantly impacts chemoresistance in colorectal cancer (CRC), while miR-375 (MicroRNA-375) enhances 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) sensitivity by selectively targeting Yes-associated protein 1 and specificity protein 1 (SP1) in CRC cells 19 Furthermore, circRNAs can function as miRNA sponges, modulating chemoresistance through sequestration of specific miRNAs, such as circ_0076305, which sponges miR-186-5p (MicroRNA-186-5p) to upregulate ABCC1 (ATP-Binding Cassette Subfamily C Member), thereby altering non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell resistance to cisplatin.

Targeting circRNAs with RNA interference (RNAi) techniques, such as siRNAs or shRNAs, can sensitize cancer cells to chemotherapy and targeted therapies. However, RNAi methods like siRNA can cause off-target gene silencing through partial matching with unintended mRNA, especially at the seed region and 3′ untranslated region (3′-UTR). While circRNA knockdown studies typically confirm unchanged linear mRNA levels, off-target effects may persist.

Additionally, enhancing specificity involves designing precise siRNAs and using clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated protein (Cas)13 systems, challenges include nonspecific tissue targeting, as some circRNAs are expressed in multiple tissues. Nevertheless, nanoparticle delivery systems may improve targeting. However, most circRNA-targeting approaches remain preclinical, facing issues such as tissue specificity and safe delivery.

Further, circRNAs interact with neoantigen presentation pathways, modulating immune recognition in cancer. However, their dysregulation is implicated in cancer progression, influencing key processes such as cell proliferation, apoptosis evasion, angiogenesis, and EMT. CircPVT1, for instance, drives tumorigenesis in several cancer types by sponging miRNAs and modulating oncogenic pathways. Additionally, circRNAs play crucial roles in metastasis, enhancing migration, invasion, and colonization of distant organs by cancer cells.

CircRNAs have emerged as valuable biomarkers for cancer diagnosis and prognosis. Their stable and tissue-specific expression and presence in bodily fluids make them ideal candidates for non-invasive cancer screening and monitoring. High-throughput sequencing has identified circRNA biomarkers across various cancer types, with their integration into clinical assessments improving diagnostic accuracy. A list of diverse types of circRNAs and their functions, design, delivery, and examples is provided in Supplementary Table 2.

CircRNAs can also influence immunotherapy resistance. For example, targeting circUHRF1 (Circular RNA derived from UHRF1) enhances responses to anti-PD-1 immunotherapy in HCC by restoring T-cell-mediated cytotoxicity and preventing immune escape. After its limitations regarding therapeutic resistance and cancer progression have been addressed, circRNA-targeted therapies can potentially improve cancer immunotherapy outcomes in the near future.

Unlocking the power of circRNAs over mRNAs: advantages in cancer vaccines

The distinctive properties of circRNAs make them particularly advantageous over commonly known long-coding RNAs, such as mRNAs, in the emerging field of therapeutics. Unlike mRNAs, circRNAs exhibit enhanced stability, resistance to exonuclease-mediated degradation, and unique regulatory functions, underscoring their potential as superior therapeutic agents. Initially, unlike eukaryotic mRNAs, which typically comprise five regions—the 5′-cap, 5′-UTR, open reading frame, 3′-UTR, and 3′-poly(A) tail—circRNAs lack the 5′-cap and 3′-poly(A) tail and possess a closed loop structure without normal polarity. Furthermore, while most mRNAs in eukaryotic cells are translated by ribosomal recruitment to the 5′-cap, followed by ribosome scanning toward a start codon in cap-dependent translation, they can also attract ribosomes via internal ribosome entry sites (IRESs) in some instances. In contrast, circRNAs can initiate translation without the need for a cap. Structurally, circRNAs have a covalently closed loop structure that enhances their stability and longevity. This structure protects them from exonuclease-mediated degradation, as the absence of free ends prevents enzymatic cleavage. Additionally, circRNAs are resistant to other decay mechanisms, such as endonucleolytic cleavage, allowing them to persist longer in cells. Interactions with RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) further stabilize circRNAs through either direct binding or interactions with their secondary structure.

Furthermore, the translation of circRNAs may vary based on specific elements such as IRESs within the circRNAs. The three exonucleases that degrade most mRNAs catalyze hydrolysis at the 3′ end, while 5′ exonucleases break down RNAs from the 5′ ends. In contrast, only a few endonucleases can degrade circRNAs. Due to its circular shape, circRNA is resistant to degradation by ribonuclease (RNase) R enzymes and RNA exonucleases. Consequently, circRNA typically shows increased stability and a longer half-life (approximately 80–116 h compared to 43–49 h). This enhanced stability makes circRNA a viable option for various applications, particularly in developing vaccines against neoantigens.

CircRNA vaccines can lead to increased antigen production. Consequently, increased and persistent target antigen expression results in a successful immune response. Because circRNAs do not integrate into the genome, gene disruption is not likely, making them safer than DNA vaccines. Due to their distinct structure and a particular translation mechanism, i.e. the rolling circle translation, allowing for the synthesis of larger proteins with less genetic material.

Exogenous circRNAs originate from sources such as pathogens and can affect cellular processes, including immune responses. When introduced into cells, exogenous circRNAs can trigger innate immunity, aiding in the elimination of pathogens and abnormal cells, including cancer cells. Unlike traditional vaccines, circRNA vaccines can activate multiple immune pathways simultaneously, potentially enhancing their effectiveness. Table 2 summarizes the advantages and drawbacks of various types of vaccines, including circRNA vaccines, highlighting their competitive structural advantages and potential applications in immunotherapy. The competitive structural advantage of circRNA vaccines over mRNA vaccines is illustrated in Supplementary Figure 2.

Cytoplasmic circRNAs form complexes with RBPs and miRNAs, acting as competing endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs) to regulate gene expression while protecting against degradation. In the nucleus, circRNAs can influence processes such as alternative splicing and gene regulation, interacting with chromatin-modifying complexes and transcription factors to shield themselves from degradation. Pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) in immune cells recognize specific pathogen-associated patterns, and circRNAs play a role in evading immune detection while providing stability and regulatory functions within cells.

Exploring circRNA vaccines in cancer: immunological perspective

An important characteristic of a tumor is the TME, which consists of several different components, such as tumor cells, immune cells, stromal cells, various signaling molecules, and even non-malignant cells. CircRNA influences these key components of the TME, resulting in either anti-tumor or pro-tumor activities. The immunological aspect is crucial in circRNA-based cancer vaccine research because the effectiveness of these vaccines depends on their ability to induce a robust and specific immune response against tumor cells and their interaction with the complex, dynamic TME. CircRNA is a type of genetic material that can activate and regulate immune cells, making it an asset in cancer immunotherapy. Typically, tumor vaccines introduce tumor-specific antigens to the body, which stimulate the immune system or generate cluster of differentiation (CD)8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs). These vaccines target tumor-associated antigens (TAAs), proteins that are minimally expressed in healthy cells but are elevated in tumor cells. Genomic instability during carcinogenesis causes mutations in coding regions, leading to neoantigens, which T-cells can recognize when presented by major histocompatibility complexes (MHCs), thereby triggering an immune response.

CircRNA vaccines not only enhance the immune system's ability to combat cancer more effectively compared to traditional vaccines due to their resistance to degradation and immune evasion but also hold the potential to modulate the activity of key immune players, such as natural killer (NK) cells. CircRNAs, including circARSP91, have been shown to enhance NK cell cytotoxicity by upregulating ULBP1, thereby augmenting the immune surveillance and tumor-killing functions of NK cells. This dual capability of circRNAs to evade immune detection while simultaneously boosting innate immune responses highlights their potential as potent agents in cancer immunotherapy, potentially overcoming the immunosuppressive effects exerted by tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), which suppress cytotoxic T-cell responses through immune checkpoint activation, metabolite depletion, and anti-inflammatory cytokine production. Notably, they can serve as targets for cancer immunotherapy and impact immune checkpoint expression, including PD-1/PD-L1 and CTLA-4. For instance, circFGFR1 interacts with miR-381-3p (MicroRNA-381-3p) to increase CXCR4, promoting resistance to anti-PD1 therapy. Furthermore, hsa-circRNA-002178 induces T-cell exhaustion by sponging miR-34 (MicroRNA-34 including miR-34a, miR-34b, and miR-34c) and consequently enhancing PD-L1 expression. Additionally, circUHRF1 upregulates TIM-3 (T-Cell Immunoglobulin and Mucin-Domain Containing-3), driving resistance to anti-PD1 therapy in HCC. Figure 1 illustrates the diverse roles of circRNAs in cellular processes, particularly their regulatory functions in tumor biology and the TME. Such findings suggest that circRNAs could be utilized in combination therapies with ICIs to enhance efficacy and overcome resistance.

Moreover, circRNAs shape the TME by influencing immune cell behavior and cytokine secretion. They can recruit immune cells, impacting the immune landscape of the tumor. For example, circNDUFB2 promotes CD8+ T cell recruitment in NSCLC, while circ_0020710 fosters regulatory T-cell infiltration, suppressing cytotoxic responses. Targeting circRNAs may enhance immunotherapy effectiveness by modifying the TME.

CircRNA-based vaccines show promise in cancer immunotherapy, particularly when combined with ICIs. Specifically, they can train the immune system to target specific neoantigens, enhancing the overall response rate. Therefore, utilizing circRNA vaccines alongside ICIs could address resistance mechanisms and improve therapeutic outcomes.

Furthermore, circRNAs are believed to play a role in macrophage polarization, with three circRNAs showing distinct expression patterns in M1 (Pro-inflammatory macrophages) cells and macrophages. Varying expression levels of particular circRNAs have been observed in various macrophage polarization states, suggesting their crucial role in this process.

Additionally, chemokines, known for attracting immune cells, are often implicated in cancer progression. In CRC, the expression of circRNA circ_0026344 was downregulated by the co-stimulation of chemokines chemokine (C–C motif) ligand 20 (CCL20) and chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 8 (CXCL8) while simultaneously treating CRC cell lines. This downregulation promoted cell migration, invasion, and EMT. Additionally, changes in the expression of circ_0026344 are correlated with lymph node metastasis and tumor progression in CRC. The increased expression of circ_0026344 promotes cellular apoptosis and regulates miR-21 and miR-23 signaling in CRC cells; it acts as a miRNA sponge for elevated levels of miR-21 and miR-31 overexpressed in CRC cells. Moreover, circFGFR1 is associated with CXCR4 expression in NSCLC, potentially enhancing anti-PD-1 therapy. Similarly, the downregulation of circ_0067934 in thyroid carcinoma reduces CXCR1 expression, leading to apoptosis and reduced proliferation, migration, and invasion. Tumor cytokines, produced by immune-suppressive or cancerous cells, contribute to an inflammatory TME. Inflammation is driven by caspase-1 activation, which leads to proinflammatory cytokine release, including IL-1β (Interleukin-1 Beta) and IL-18 (Interleukin-18). CircRNAs such as hsa_circRNA_00217 8 in breast cancer and circ-0016347 in osteosarcoma have been shown to modulate inflammation-related pathways, suggesting a role for circRNAs in regulating tumor inflammation and progression.

Innovations in the design and delivery of circRNA-based cancer vaccines

In vitro, circRNA synthesis begins with linear RNA precursor generation, followed by end ligation to form a closed-loop structure. Precursor design involves incorporating essential vaccine elements. CircRNA vaccines utilize host translation machinery, requiring antigen-encoding open reading frames (ORFs) in precursors. The optimization of this process involves selecting efficient coding sequences, taking into account codon bias and mRNA stability. Translation efficiency is enhanced by strategically incorporating elements such as Kozak sequences and IRES. Specific hexamers have been identified that trigger circRNA translation.

Circularization of linear RNA involves innovative chemical and enzymatic methods to create stable, functional RNA loops essential for vaccine development. The various methods of RNA circularization include the permuted intron-exon (PIE) method, hairpin ribozyme-based circularization, enzymatic ligation, and chemical ligation, are presented in Figure 2. These methods are crucial for effective circRNA synthesis. Supplementary Table 1 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of different ligation methods for circRNA synthesis, offering a quick reference for researchers in this field.

Chemical approaches, such as phosphoramidite and solid-based synthesis, utilize derivatives of natural nucleoside triphosphates with inactive protective groups, replacing reactive amino and hydroxyl groups. However, these methods have limited circularization capacity. Chemical strategies using cyanogen bromide (BrCN) or water-soluble carbodiimides, such as EDC/EDAC/EDCI (1-Ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide/1-Ethyl-3-(dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide hydrochloride/1-Ethyl-3-(dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide isomer), link the 5′-end phosphate to the 3′-end hydroxyl group on linear RNA, facilitating circularization through self-templating driven by its intrinsic secondary structure.

In contrast, enzymatic RNA circularization is typically more efficient and catalyzed by enzymes such as T4 DNA ligase, which repairs nicks in double-stranded RNA substrates. However, this method requires cytidine and adenosine at ligation sites and significant amounts of enzyme due to its low turnover efficiency on RNA. T4 RNA ligase II and the use of complementary DNA or RNA splints can enhance intramolecular ligation, occasionally resulting in RNA concatemers. Another RNA circularization method includes ribozymes, which are RNA enzymes that can catalyze the ligation of precursor RNAs to form circRNAs using antisense sequences to direct specific operations.

Techniques such as the PIE method involve adding IRES and optimized accessory sequences to boost stability and protein expression in eukaryotic cells. Group I intron catalysis, employing components such as pre-tRNAleu and thymidylate synthase (td) genes, along with guanosine triphosphate (GTP) and Mg2+, enables high-yield circRNA synthesis. Furthermore, its synthesis can employ genomes of subviral agents such as viroids and hepatitis delta virus, which contain hairpin ribozymes (HPRs) and hammerhead ribozymes with intrinsic cleavage and ligation capabilities. These elements enable circRNA production from circular, single-stranded DNA templates and potentially expand RNA circularization through “Twister” aptamers, recognized by tRNA endonuclease to produce 2′, 3′-cyclic phosphate groups.

After circRNA production, its structure needs to be confirmed. The ligation site, which is the head-to-tail junction created by the ends of the linear RNA precursor, is found in circRNA but not in the linear RNA precursor and is used as a marker for validation. Therefore, after performing reverse transcription and synthesizing cDNA, primers that span the ligation site can be used in polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to detect the presence of circRNA.

Purification

Following the completion of circRNA synthesis, maintaining its purity is crucial, as the low immunogenicity of circRNA and successful protein expression depend heavily on the absolute homogeneity of its components. Although the PIE approach is beneficial for synthesizing larger linear RNAs and streamlining processes, it often generates undesired byproducts such as excised intron fragments, linear precursor remnants, and nicked circRNAs. These contaminants, particularly linear RNAs, are problematic because they act as potent immunogens, potentially triggering innate immune responses. This necessitates thorough purification and verification of circRNA purity. Various electrophoresis methods, such as denaturing agarose gel electrophoresis (DAGE), capillary electrophoresis (CE), and polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE), are commonly employed to assess the composition of RNA. These methods utilize migration patterns to differentiate circRNA from linear RNA precursors and other contaminants. PAGE, in particular, is excellent for separating nucleic acids by size, which helps to minimize unwanted byproducts. However, despite their effectiveness in quality testing, these techniques fall short in large-scale purification operations due to heat generation, which can compromise RNA stability.

To enhance purification, RNase R treatment is employed to selectively digest linear RNA impurities. CircRNAs, due to their closed-loop structure, are more stable and resistant to exonuclease digestion than linear RNAs. In laboratory settings, this structural advantage allows RNase R to effectively digest linear RNA, facilitating circRNA identification. However, this method faces challenges in industrial-scale production because linear RNA precursors with complex secondary structures are less susceptible to digestion, resulting in inadequate purification. Techniques such as high-temperature heating and chemical treatments can be used to disassemble RNA secondary structures, but their compatibility with subsequent enrichment techniques remains unclear. High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) is an effective method for isolating RNA mixtures based on molecular size and polarity with high sensitivity and precision. Although size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) is a slower and less precise method, integrating it with HPLC (SE-HPLC) enhances the characterization of complex samples and effectively removes smaller intron fragments. SE-HPLC combined with RNase R digestion enhances the separation of circRNA, nicked circRNA, and linear RNA precursors, achieving circRNA purity of up to 90%. Nonetheless, despite technological advances, achieving 100% pure circRNA remains a challenge. Splicing reactions followed by RNase R digestion and HPLC purification can mitigate some immunogenic RNA species, but they do not fully succeed in preventing innate immune responses and cytokine release. Therefore, innovative approaches that go beyond the current methods of RNase R digestion and HPLC for circRNA purification are needed, reflecting the potential for further improvement in this process.

Delivery

The comprehensive purification and delivery of circRNA vaccines are critical aspects in their efficacy and safety. Effective delivery mechanisms are crucial for protecting engineered circRNA vaccines and facilitating their transport across cell membranes, as the electronegativity and hydrophilicity of nucleic acid drugs hinder their passage through the anionic lipid bilayer of cell membranes. Moreover, delivery systems safeguard nucleic acid drugs from degradation by endogenous nucleases and the immune system, ensuring targeted expression. Current delivery methods for engineered circRNA include carrier-free delivery, lipid nanoparticle delivery, exosome delivery, and other potential carrier methods, as described in Figure 3. CircRNAs, known for producing specific antigens in the cytoplasm, cannot diffuse freely across cell membranes due to their unique closed-loop structure. This structure not only protects circRNAs from exonuclease degradation but also enhances their formulation and distribution, allowing for carrier-free administration. For example, naked circRNA injected into tumor tissues has shown specific expression products, underscoring its potential in immunotherapeutics. Traditional delivery methods such as gene guns, electroporation, and microneedles, effective for naked mRNA antigen presentation, can also be used for naked circRNA vaccines. A robust delivery system is crucial for circRNA vaccines to evade immune detection and reach target sites and ensures that other challenges faced by RNA-based therapeutic tools are addressed, including serum protein interactions, phagocyte uptake, and nuclease degradation.

Carrier-free delivery

The unique structure of circRNAs facilitates their direct delivery to tissues and cells, allowing for carrier-free administration. For example, Yang et al. successfully injected naked circRNA encoding luciferase into various mouse models, resulting in significant bioluminescence at tumor sites. CircRNA dissolved in Ringer's solution improved luciferase expression and was influenced by calcium and potassium ion concentrations. Given their stability and lower immunogenicity compared to those of mRNA, circRNAs can be directly injected, but further in vivo and clinical trial researches are required. Traditional physical delivery methods, such as electroporation, have shown promise. Husseini et al. demonstrated effective intradermal delivery of a naked mRNA vaccine via ion electroporation, inducing a robust immune response and tumor suppression in melanoma models.

Lipid-based delivery systems

Liposomes are versatile nanocarriers for both hydrophobic and hydrophilic molecules, enhancing cellular uptake while evading phagocytosis. Lipid nanoparticles (LNPs), typically <100 nm in size, consist of neutral phospholipids, cholesterol, polyethylene glycol (PEG) lipids, and cationic ionizable lipids. These components bolster stability and allow controlled delivery. Cationic lipids promote membrane fusion and endosome formation, enhancing RNA encapsulation and transfection efficiency, while PEG lipids and cholesterol improve stability and intracellular delivery. LNPs employ mechanisms such as the ApoE-LDLR (Apolipoprotein E − Low-Density Lipoprotein Receptor) pathway to enable fusion with cell membranes and subsequent RNA release via endosome escape. Key lipid components, including 1,2-Dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium-propane, 1,2-Dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine, 1,2-Dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium-propane (methyl sulfate) (DOTAP, DOPE, and DOTMA), enhance delivery efficiency, while YSK12–C4 (cationic lipid used for siRNA delivery) facilitates endosomal escape. Manganese acts as an adjuvant, activating the stimulator of interferon genes (STING) pathway. Typical administration routes for LNP-encapsulated circRNA involve subcutaneous, intramuscular, and intradermal methods. For example, LNP-encapsulated circRNA encoding the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) RBD (Receptor Binding Domain) antigen has effectively generated robust immune responses in mice and macaques. Recent innovations in LNP strategies, such as charge-altering releasable transporters (CARTs) and multiarmed ionizable lipids (AX4-LNPs), demonstrate potential for prolonged circRNA delivery and accelerated vaccine release. Notably, AX4-LNP systems create proinflammatory tumor environments without adverse effects, showcasing advanced clinical applicability, as observed with coronavirus disease 2019 mRNA vaccines. Nevertheless, further research is essential to effectively develop circRNA vaccines.

In vivo delivery of circRNA typically involves intramuscular administration, where antigen-presenting cells (APCs) uptake circRNA-LNPs through endosomal fusion. Once inside, circRNAs associate with ribosomes for antigen protein translation. The proteasome degrades intracellular antigens into fragments presented on MHC I to CD8+ T-cells, activating them. Additionally, translated antigens can stimulate B cells via B-cell receptors (BCRs), transforming them into plasma cells that secrete immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibodies. These antibodies can then be taken up by APCs, degraded, and presented on MHC class II. The interaction between CD4+ T-cells and APCs enhances macrophage activation and somatic hypermutation in B cells, leading to memory cell formation or the release of immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies into the bloodstream.

Challenges and innovations in lipid nanoparticles

Despite their advantages, LNPs face challenges such as poor heat resistance and potential inflammatory effects, prompting research into lyophilized formulations and improved cryopreservation techniques. Recent studies indicate that encapsulated circRNA can effectively express in target cells and generate immune responses in mouse models, confirming LNPs as suitable circRNA carriers. Notably, H1L1A1B3 LNPs delivered circRNA to lung tumors more efficiently compared to Pfizer/BioNTech LNPs, eliciting strong immune responses and tumor regression in mouse models.

Effective delivery mechanisms are crucial for protecting engineered circRNA vaccines and facilitating their transport across cell membranes, as the electronegativity and hydrophilicity of nucleic acid drugs hinder their passage through the anionic lipid bilayer of cell membranes. Delivery systems also safeguard nucleic acid drugs from degradation by endogenous nucleases and the immune system, ensuring targeted expression. Current delivery methods for engineered circRNA include carrier-free delivery, lipid nanoparticle delivery, exosome delivery, and other potential carrier methods.

Targeted delivery strategies

Targeting the liver and lymph nodes

LNPs often face challenges related to liver accumulation, which can lead to liver damage. Novel LNPs, such as 113-O12B, are designed to target lymph nodes, thereby reducing the risk of liver damage and immune-mediated hepatitis. YK009-LNP has demonstrated favorable biodistribution with decreased liver toxicity, while AX4-LNP features degradable linkers for rapid clearance from the liver and spleen, generating strong immune responses.

Targeting dendritic cells

Enhancing vaccine efficacy while minimizing side effects can be achieved by targeting dendritic cells (DCs). LNPs presenting specific ligands can effectively target DCs, with ApoE (Apolipoprotein E) facilitating uptake by human DCs. Continued research is needed to improve DC-targeted delivery systems.

Other delivery strategies

Naked circRNA vaccines, administered directly, rely on APCs for uptake. Techniques such as intradermal injection or ultrasound-guided lymph node injections can activate immune responses, while intratumoral injections enhance tumor immunotherapy. Although the inherent stability of circRNA is advantageous, further in vivo and clinical trials are essential.

Alternative delivery systems for mRNA, including polymeric nanoparticles, cationic nanoemulsions, and exosomes, can be adapted for circRNA delivery. Polymeric nanoparticles offer stability, high payload efficiency, and customizability, while cationic nanoemulsions leverage electrostatic interactions. Exosomes, naturally released by cells, show promise for circRNA delivery, enhancing stability and bioavailability while minimizing immune recognition. Utilizing exosome delivery can facilitate circRNA transfer to various cells, providing advantages for drug delivery, particularly in tumor targeting and enhancing anticancer efficacy.

Translational milestones: from bench to bedside with circRNA vaccines

Translational research combines clinical insights with laboratory research, driving advancements in human trials and diagnostics with an emphasis on community acceptance, cost-effectiveness, and treatment strategies. Among the promising cancer vaccines, mRNA vaccines have shown significant potential; however, they are prone to RNase degradation, as discussed in “Unlocking the Power of Circular Ribonucleic Acids Over Messenger Ribonucleic Acids: Advantages in Cancer Vaccines.” In contrast, circRNA vaccines have demonstrated promising outcomes.

Li et al. highlighted circRNA vaccines’ superior results in SARS-CoV-2 studies. Though still nascent in cancer treatment, circRNA vaccines hold great potential. Yang et al. introduced chemically modified RNA (cmRNA), which supports substantial, sustained protein expression. When encoding cytokines, cmRNA injected into tumors improved systemic antitumor immune responses, enhancing tumor suppression in syngeneic mouse models treated with PD-1 antibodies. This formulation triggers significant CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell infiltration, boosting intratumoral antitumor activity. The capacity of cmRNA to express diverse proteins further underscores its potential in vaccine development. Amaya et al. demonstrated that circRNA vaccines induce robust adaptive immune responses, inhibiting tumor growth in mice. Similarly, Li et al. showed that circRNA vaccines delivered via LNPs elicit a strong innate immune response, activating antigen-specific cytotoxic T-cells to eliminate resistant tumors. The ability of circRNA vaccines to prolong antigen presentation by APCs significantly boosts the activation and persistence of T-cell responses. Moreover, combining circRNA vaccination with ACT therapy has shown remarkable effectiveness in late-stage mouse tumor models. This synergy not only enhances the cytotoxic T-cell response but also improves the durability of T-cell memory, enabling a more robust and sustained anti-tumor effect. The combination approach can potentially overcome challenges posed by immune evasion mechanisms that many tumors develop, providing a dual strategy for tumor eradication. In preclinical studies, this combination led to complete tumor regression in models of immune-excluded and immune-desert tumors, demonstrating the potential for circRNA vaccines to serve as primary or adjuvant cancer therapies. These findings highlight the versatility and promise of circRNA-based approaches in enhancing the effectiveness of existing immunotherapeutic strategies, paving the way for their application in challenging malignancies.

CircRNAs are deregulated in multiple cancers, such as CRC, HCC, and lung adenocarcinomas, correlating with cancer progression and metastasis. High-throughput sequencing has identified distinct circRNA expression patterns in lung adenocarcinoma plasma exosomes, revealing 105 upregulated and 78 downregulated circRNAs compared to controls. In gastric cancer, circRNAs drive tumor behavior via the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B (Akt)/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway. These findings highlight their potential as diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers, providing a foundation for the development of strategies for early detection and targeted therapies. Moreover, circRNA vaccines function as important cancer immunotherapies and biomarkers. Due to their resistance to degradation, circRNAs persist in body fluids, making them ideal for noninvasive liquid biopsies and diagnostic purposes. Recent studies demonstrate that circRNA vaccines encode tumor-specific neoantigens, training the immune system to target these cancers, thus offering avenues for further development of innovative cancer therapies.

Emerging trends and challenges

In the field of vaccine development, a significant shift toward harnessing the potential of circRNA vaccines has emerged, marked by their unique “self-adjuvant” effect akin to linear mRNA vaccines, yet distinguished by characteristics necessitating careful consideration in research and development.2 Current efforts are concentrated on optimizing circRNA vaccine design and formulation, with circularization efficiency serving as a pivotal stage influencing vaccine capacity and subsequent purification processes. Unlike mRNA vaccines, circRNA vaccines possess a loop structure, demanding tailored approaches for efficient circularization of different target sequences, wherein intron sequences and exon length also play critical roles.

Personalized treatment

The growing field of personalized therapy aims to apply the most appropriate and optimized therapy regime to each patient. In cancer therapy, personalized treatment involves focusing on particular mutations found in a patient's tumor. CircRNA vaccines can be designed to encode neoantigens that result from tumor-specific mutations. Notably, the individual's immune system can be trained to identify and fight against tumor cells expressing these antigens by developing a vaccine that encodes these neoantigens. CircRNA vaccines can be engineered such that particular changes or sequences can be incorporated to improve vaccine immunogenicity. This targeted treatment approach allows for more effective and precise immune response against patients' unique cancer types and characteristics.

Challenges

CircRNAs are unique molecules that function as efficient miRNA sponges, promoting the development of immune cells, signaling control, and anticancer activities. However, comprehensive studies on their impacts on linear mRNA expression, epigenetic modifications, and involvement in innate immunity and cancer progression are scarce. To enhance the therapeutic potential of circRNA-based vaccines, issues such as biosafety, yield optimization, and modification processes must be addressed. Table 3 provides an overview of the major challenges associated with circRNA vaccines. Advanced techniques such as CRISPR-Cas9 for gene expression modification and improved detection methods are crucial for advancing circRNA research.

CircRNA vaccines can play a pivotal role in gene expression associated with the TME in several types of cancer. Current research focuses on establishing innovations in circRNA vaccine development and exploring the immune mechanism activated by circRNA expression. However, future research needs to address challenges associated with the quantification, delivery, and computational analysis of circRNA constructs to develop stable circRNA vaccines capable of eliciting an immune response against cancerous cells.

Conclusion

CircRNAs are unique molecules with significant roles in the immune system, including acting as miRNA sponges and contributing to cell differentiation and immune cell development. Furthermore, they regulate cell signaling pathways during activation and exhibit antitumor functions, particularly in breast cancer, by modulating tumor progression. However, the mechanisms through which circRNAs influence immune responses and cancer progression remain underexplored, presenting a challenge in fully understanding their potential. The translation of circRNAs into functional small proteins that may act as molecular inhibitors in cancer is promising but requires further evidence-based research. Additionally, circRNA-based vaccines face challenges related to biosafety, drug responses, and their potential interference with linear mRNA expression, which could lead to epigenetic mutations during cancer metastasis. Further innovations involving CRISPR-Cas9 techniques and optimized reaction conditions are needed to overcome these obstacles and enhance the utility of circRNAs in therapeutic settings.

Authors contribution

U. Das: conceptualization, validation, writing - original draft, writing - review & editing, visualization, supervision, project administration; S. Banerjee: writing - original draft, writing - review & editing, visualization, supervision; M. Sarkar: writing - original draft, writing - review & editing, visualization; F. Muhammad L: writing - original draft, writing - review & editing, visualization; T. K. Soni: writing - original draft, writing - review & editing, visualization; M. Saha: writing - review & editing, visualization; G. Pradhan: writing - review & editing, visualization; B. Chatterjee: writing - original draft. All authors critically revised the paper and approved the final version.

Ethics statement

None.

Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process

The writing of this review paper involved the use of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies to enhance the clarity, coherence, and overall quality of the manuscript. These tools were employed to assist in drafting, structuring, and editing the text. The author acknowledges the contributions of AI in the writing process while ensuring that the final content reflects the author's own insights and interpretations of the literature. All interpretations and conclusions drawn in this manuscript are the sole responsibility of the author.

Funding

None.

Conflict of interest

None.
