---
pmid: '40717708'
doi: 10.2147/ITT.S491464
pmcid: PMC12296714
title: Hepatic Metabolic Signature and Its Association with the Response to Immunotherapy
  in Hepatocellular Carcinoma.
authors:
- Park Hyewon
- Park Sowon
- Park Kena
- Yim Sun Young
- Lee Ju-Seog
- Lee Sung Hwan
journal: ImmunoTargets and therapy
year: 2025
month: null
volume: '14'
issue: ''
pages: 787-798
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.2147/itt.s491464
cited_by_count: 0
mesh_terms: []
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types:
- liver
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- IMbrave150
- atezolizumab
- bevacizumab
- sorafenib
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Liver Disease Diagnosis and Treatment
diseases_annotated:
- HCC
- HCC tumors
- Hepatocellular Carcinoma
- hepatocellular carcinoma
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 0
icite_rcr: null
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
biology_processes: []
resistant_states: []
pathway_targets: []
---

# Hepatic Metabolic Signature and Its Association with the Response to Immunotherapy in Hepatocellular Carcinoma.

## Abstract

**INTRODUCTION**: Increased metabolic activity is frequently observed in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, the impact of this increased metabolic activity on the efficacy of current treatments, such as the combination immunotherapy using atezolizumab and bevacizumab for HCC, remains unknown.

**METHODS**: Gene expression data from mouse livers representing hepatic metabolic activity and HCC patient tumor tissues were used to identify a transcriptomic signature for high metabolic activity in HCC tumors. The hepatic metabolic signature (HMS) was used to categorize HCC patients treated with atezolizumab plus bevacizumab or sorafenib from the IMbrave150 clinical trial into high-or low-metabolic groups, using multiple statistical approaches to evaluate the clinical relevance of the signature.

**RESULTS**: The study uncovered a robust association between high HMS and poor overall survival in HCC patients across multiple independent cohorts. Notably, high HMS patients in IMbrave150 did not show significant benefit of the atezolizumab-bevacizumab treatment in terms of overall survival or progression-free survival compared to sorafenib monotherapy. Conversely, low HMS patients demonstrated superior overall and progression-free survival outcomes with the combination regimen relative to sorafenib alone. Furthermore, an association between high HMS and features of hepatic stem cells and increased genomic instability was identified.

**CONCLUSION**: This study provides compelling evidence that the HMS could be a predictive biomarker to identify potential HCC patients with therapeutic benefits from combination immunotherapy with atezolizumab and bevacizumab. Leveraging such predictive metabolic biomarkers may pave the way for tailored, precision medicine strategies that maximize therapeutic responses and improve outcomes for HCC patients.

## Full Text

Hepatic Metabolic Signature and Its Association with the Response to Immunotherapy in Hepatocellular Carcinoma

Introduction

Increased metabolic activity is frequently observed in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, the impact of this increased metabolic activity on the efficacy of current treatments, such as the combination immunotherapy using atezolizumab and bevacizumab for HCC, remains unknown.

Methods

Gene expression data from mouse livers representing hepatic metabolic activity and HCC patient tumor tissues were used to identify a transcriptomic signature for high metabolic activity in HCC tumors. The hepatic metabolic signature (HMS) was used to categorize HCC patients treated with atezolizumab plus bevacizumab or sorafenib from the IMbrave150 clinical trial into high—or low-metabolic groups, using multiple statistical approaches to evaluate the clinical relevance of the signature.

Results

The study uncovered a robust association between high HMS and poor overall survival in HCC patients across multiple independent cohorts. Notably, high HMS patients in IMbrave150 did not show significant benefit of the atezolizumab-bevacizumab treatment in terms of overall survival or progression-free survival compared to sorafenib monotherapy. Conversely, low HMS patients demonstrated superior overall and progression-free survival outcomes with the combination regimen relative to sorafenib alone. Furthermore, an association between high HMS and features of hepatic stem cells and increased genomic instability was identified.

Conclusion

This study provides compelling evidence that the HMS could be a predictive biomarker to identify potential HCC patients with therapeutic benefits from combination immunotherapy with atezolizumab and bevacizumab. Leveraging such predictive metabolic biomarkers may pave the way for tailored, precision medicine strategies that maximize therapeutic responses and improve outcomes for HCC patients.

Introduction

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the most common primary liver cancer, poses a significant global health threat. It is the fastest rising and second deadliest cancer worldwide, with an estimated 41,630 new cases projected in the United States alone for 2024. The poor prognosis of HCC can be attributed to the fact that less than one-third of patients qualify for potentially curative treatments such as surgical resection, liver transplantation, or ablation therapies upon diagnosis. For the vast majority presenting with advanced, inoperable disease, current standard-of-care therapy involves systemic treatment with the combination immunotherapy regimen of atezolizumab (a PD-L1 inhibitor) and bevacizumab (an anti-angiogenic agent). While earlier efforts with single-agent immunotherapy with immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) yielded limited success in HCC, the landmark IMbrave150 trial demonstrated a breakthrough in improved survival outcomes with the combination of atezolizumab and bevacizumab compared to the previous standard-of-care, sorafenib. Despite this progress, not all patients derive substantial benefit from this combination regimen, highlighting the pressing need for predictive biomarkers to guide treatment selection and optimize therapeutic responses.

A hallmark feature of cancer cells is their ability to reprogram cellular metabolism to meet the heightened energy and biosynthetic demands of rapid proliferation. Many cancers, including HCC, exhibit deregulated and elevated metabolic activity, enabling them to thrive even in resource-limited environments within the tumor microenvironment. A prime example of this metabolic reprogramming is the increased uptake and utilization of glucose through aerobic glycolysis (the “Warburg effect”), despite the presence of oxygen. Given the liver’s central role as the body’s primary metabolic hub, it is not surprising that HCC cells display highly dysregulated metabolic profiles compared to normal hepatocytes. However, the clinical implications of these metabolic alterations on the effectiveness of novel immunotherapeutic regimens remain largely unexplored.

The metabolic landscape of cancer cells is linked to various hallmarks of malignancy, such as constant cell growth, resistance to cell death, avoidance of growth inhibition, induction of invasion and metastasis, and activation of angiogenesis. Moreover, emerging evidence suggests that metabolic reprogramming may also modulate the tumor immune microenvironment and influence responses to immunotherapy. For instance, the increased glycolytic activity and lactate production associated with the Warburg effect can lead to an acidic tumor microenvironment, which has been shown to impair the function and infiltration of cytotoxic T cells and natural killer cells. Additionally, metabolic competition for nutrients between cancer cells and immune cells may also contribute to the suppression of anti-tumor immunity.

In this study, we leveraged a novel systems biology approach to define a hepatic metabolic signature (HMS) based on gene expression data from mouse liver tissues and human HCC tumors. We then applied this HMS to gene expression profiles from the IMbrave150 clinical trial cohort to evaluate the potential clinical utility of metabolic biomarkers in predicting response to the atezolizumab-bevacizumab combination immunotherapy regimen. Identifying predictive biomarkers that can stratify patients most likely to benefit from such regimens could significantly advance precision oncology efforts and improve overall survival outcomes in HCC.

Given the integral role of metabolic reprogramming in various cancer hallmarks and its emerging links to tumor immunity, a deeper understanding of the metabolic landscape in HCC may not only provide novel insights into disease biology but also unveil new avenues for therapeutic intervention. By elucidating the impact of metabolic activity on immunotherapeutic responses, our study aims to refine patient stratification and inform personalized treatment strategies, ultimately advancing the effectiveness of standard-of-care regimens for this highly lethal malignancy.

Materials and Methods

Identification of Hepatic Metabolic Signature

This study received approval for exemption from review from the Institutional Review Board of CHA Bundang Medical Center, Seongnam, South Korea. To uncover genes reflecting high metabolism in the liver, we utilized publicly available gene expression data from mouse liver tissues (accessible through the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus under accession number GSE92502) as a discovery dataset. We specifically focused on genes that displayed a significant increase in expression in mice fed both fructose and glucose compared to a control diet. A supervised comparison using Student’s t-test was performed to extract metabolism-specific gene sets showing statistical significance p-value less than 0.01 from the discovery dataset. This analysis resulted in a set of 416 genes, designated as the “hepatic metabolic signature” (HMS), due to their roles in regulating liver metabolism (Figure 1A). 

mRNA Expression and Clinical Data from HCC Patients

This study utilizes mRNA expression data from five patient cohorts diagnosed with HCC who underwent surgical resection as their primary treatment (Table 1): Fudan Cohort (GSE14520), Sam Sung Cohort (GSE36376), Modena Cohort (GSE54236), Zhongshan Hospital Cohort (National Omics Data Encyclopedia accession number OEP000321), and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) HCC cohort. Using the Bayesian covariate compound predictor method, we estimated the HMS score based on the similarity of gene expression pattern with the HMS transcriptomic signature from the discovery cohort into five HCC validation cohorts.

Patients in IMbrave150 and GO30140 and Related RNA Expression Data

This study leverages data from two clinical trials investigating atezolizumab-based therapy for unresectable HCC: IMbrave150 (NCT03434379) and GO30140 (NCT02715531). GO30140 trial evaluated the safety and dosage of atezolizumab, both alone and combined with bevacizumab. IMbrave150 trial evaluated the efficacy of atezolizumab with bevacizumab compared to sorafenib, a standard HCC treatment. We focused on patients who received atezolizumab plus bevacizumab or sorafenib treatment and had available gene expression data. After excluding patients without clinical outcome data, a total of 295 patients were included in the analysis: 247 in the atezolizumab-bevacizumab arm and 48 in the sorafenib arm. This combined dataset is referred to as “IMbrave150GO” throughout this study. RNA sequencing was performed using the Illumina TruSeq RNA Access platform and analyzed following established protocols. Briefly, ribosomal RNA reads were removed, and the remaining reads were aligned to the human reference genome (hg38) using GSNAP. Gene expression levels were quantified by counting reads mapped to RefSeq gene exons. Raw gene counts were then normalized using TMM normalization and voom transformation to generate normalized log2 (counts per million) data. Finally, gene features were filtered based on pre-defined expression and variance thresholds for further analysis.

Data Analysis

The mRNA expression data that were collected were normalized and transformed in line with previous studies. BRB-ArrayTools (v4.6.1), a freely available analysis tool from the NCI, was used to construct predictive models to evaluate the clinical relevance of ISS. TreeView (v 1.6) and Cluster (v 3.0) were employed to visualize the data. The R language (v 4.1.2) was used for statistical analysis.

Before combining gene expression data from TCGA-LIHC and IMbrave150GO for prediction, we normalized the data from both datasets independently using z-scores (z = (x - mean) / standard deviation). Next, we employed a Bayesian compound covariate prediction (BCCP) algorithm to measure the likelihood of a specific human tumor tissue exhibiting a particular gene expression pattern observed in mouse tissues. The expression data from sugar-fed and tap water-fed mouse livers (training sets) were integrated to create a classifier using the BCCP model. To assess the model’s robustness, we employed leave-one-out cross-validation during training, which estimates the misclassification rate. In the mouse training set, the model achieved perfect sensitivity (1.0) and specificity (1.0) for predicting sugar-fed liver tissue. The BCCP model was then used to estimate the probability of hepatic metabolic activity in individual human HCC samples. Tumors were subsequently dichotomized based on Bayesian probabilities, with a cut-off value of 0.33. This cut-off value reflects the 2:1 split between the sugar-fed and tap water-fed groups in the training data, ensuring consistency with the class distribution. Finally, we calculated the probability of each tumor harboring hepatic stem cells (HSC) by using a previously established HSC gene expression signature to those from the human tumors.

Results

Prognostic Association of Hepatic Metabolic Signature

We identified genes exhibiting significant association with increased metabolic activity in mouse liver tissues by analyzing mRNA expression data from liver samples of mice fed either fructose or glucose, compared to a control group receiving tap water. A total of 416 genes showing consistent differential expression across two independent comparisons were selected to form the hepatic metabolic signature (HMS) (Figure 1A). With this gene expression signature established for increased metabolic activity in the liver, we proceeded to explore its clinical relevance in human HCC by extracting the expression of the HMS genes from patient tumor samples and comparing them to the defined mouse-derived HMS. To evaluate the clinical significance of the HMS in HCC, a classifier model was constructed using the mouse HMS data as a training set, employing a Bayesian compound covariate prediction (BCCP) algorithm. This model estimated the likelihood of high metabolic activity within each human HCC tumor based on its gene expression profile (Figure 1B). Patients from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) HCC cohort (n=371) were classified into two groups based on their Bayesian probability of high metabolic activity, using a cutoff of 0.33 as predicted by the BCCP model (Figure 1C). Kaplan-Meier survival analysis demonstrated a significant disparity in overall survival (OS) between these two groups post-treatment (p=1.0 x 10−4 by Log rank test) (Figure 1D), indicating that elevated metabolic activity in HCC tumors profoundly influences patient outcomes following therapeutic intervention.

To further validate the clinical relevance of HMS, we assessed its correlation with patient prognosis in four independent HCC cohorts: Sam Sung (n=240), Fudan (n=242), ZhongShan (n=159), and Modena (n=78) (Table 1 and Figure 2). The BCCP model, developed using the TCGA cohort, was then applied to these datasets. Kaplan-Meier analysis conducted across the four cohorts once again revealed significant disparities in OS between the two HMS subgroups (with p-values ranging from 0.002 to 1.0×10−4) (Figure 2). These collective findings provide compelling evidence of a robust association between increased HMS and diminished overall survival rates among HCC patients. 

HMS is Significantly Associated with Response to the Combination Treatment with Atezolizumab and Bevacizumab

Since the combination immunotherapy with atezolizumab and bevacizumab has become the standard first-line treatment for nonresectable HCC, we investigated whether HMS is associated with the response to the combination treatment in HCC. Kaplan-Meier plots and Log rank tests on OS data revealed that patients identified as low HMS subtype by the BCCP model exhibited better OS and PFS outcomes with atezolizumab and bevacizumab treatment compared to sorafenib (Figure 3A and B). In contrast, patients predicted as high HMS subtype showed no significant difference in OS or PFS between the two treatment arms. These findings suggest that HMS-based prediction can potentially identify patients more likely to benefit from atezolizumab-bevacizumab therapy, highlighting a strong association between the HMS and treatment response. 

Further supporting this association, Cox proportional hazard regression analysis also revealed a significant advantage of the combination treatment over sorafenib, specifically among patients classified under the HMS low subtype. This advantage was seen in OS among patients classified under the HMS low subtype (HR 0.536, 95% CI 0.328–0.877, p=0.01) but not those classified under the HMS high subtype (HR 0.894 95% CI 0.5–1.6, p=0.7; Figure 3C). Comparable association was also seen in PFS (HMS low subtype, HR 0.344, 95% CI 0.173–0.688, p=0.002; HMS high subtype, HR 0.657, 95% CI 0.335–1.29, p=0.22; Figure 3C).

Overall, our results demonstrate that the combination treatment significantly extends OS and PFS compared to sorafenib monotherapy specifically in patients with the HMS low subtype and further suggest that the benefit of the combination treatment might be attributable to differences in the underlying metabolic activity between subtypes.

Biological Characteristics in HMS Subtypes

We next investigated the potential connection between the HMS subtypes and the presence of hepatic stem cells (HSCs) within the tumors. An HSC signature from a previous study was applied to the gene expression data of the HCC tumors. The analysis revealed that the high HMS subtype tumors exhibited a significantly higher probability of harboring HSCs compared to the low HMS subtype (p<0.001, Student’s t-test) (Figure 4A). This suggests that the elevated metabolic activity observed in these aggressive tumors might originate from genetic or genomic alterations specifically affecting HSCs. To further strengthen our findings, we examined the expression levels of established HSC markers in the tumors. As expected, the high HMS subtype tumors displayed significantly higher expression of these markers, including AFP, KRT19, EPCAM, and SALL4, compared to the low HMS subtype (Figure 4B). Collectively, these results suggest a strong correlation between the HMS subtypes and the presence of HSC-like features within the tumors, implying that heightened metabolic activity might be linked to genetic or genomic changes within these stem cells. 

To gain deeper insights into the biological processes unique to the high HMS subtype, we employed Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. This analysis identified differentially expressed genes between the HMS high and low tumors in both The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and IMbrave150GO cohorts. As anticipated, the analysis revealed a prominent enrichment of pathways associated with cancer metabolism in the high HMS subtype tumors (Figure 5). These pathways included ERK/MAPK signaling, translation elongation, RAC signaling, cell cycle checkpoint regulation, integrin signaling, mTOR signaling, and glucose metabolism. These findings support the notion that the high HMS subtype is characterized by increased metabolic activity and proliferation, potentially explaining its poorer prognosis and response to combination therapy. Further investigation of these pathways holds promise for uncovering novel insights into HCC biology. 

Mutations and Genomic Alterations Associated with HMS Subtype

To gain a deeper understanding of the biological differences between the HMS subtypes, we analyzed the genomic data available for the TCGA cohort. No significant differences were observed in the overall number of mutations (mutation burden) between the high and low HMS subtypes (Figure 6A). In contrast, there were significant variations in copy number alterations between the subtypes. The high HMS subtype displayed a considerably higher frequency of copy number alterations compared to the low HMS subtype (Figure 6B). We further investigated specific gene mutations associated with each subtype (Figure 6C). Notably, mutations in TP53 and BAP1 genes were significantly enriched in the high HMS subtype. Conversely, mutations in CTNNB1 (encoding beta-catenin), IL6ST, and ACVR2A genes were more prevalent in the low HMS subtype. These findings suggest distinct mutational landscapes for the two subtypes, potentially influencing their biological behavior. 

Discussion

Our findings in this study highlight the clinical significance of an HMS in HCC and its potential implications for patient stratification and treatment prediction. The HMS was initially identified as a gene expression signature associated with high metabolic activity in mouse liver tissues. Remarkably, this metabolic signature demonstrated a robust prognostic association with OS in multiple independent HCC cohorts, including TCGA, Sam Sung, Fudan, ZhongShan, and Modena. Contrary to our previous paper for predicting response to combination immunotherapy using the immune signature score from 10 immune-specific key gene expressions, we designed this study to predict clinical outcomes using the HMS consisting of metabolism-specific transcriptomic features from the pre-clinical model. To evaluate the impact of metabolic factors on therapeutic response in HCC, we utilized transcriptome data from mice that metabolically perturbed dietary fructose or glucose. Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) and metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH) are nowadays highlighted as an emerging cause of liver cirrhosis and HCC. Evaluating the metabolic impact regarding tumor biology is crucial to clarify the clinical relevance of the immunotherapy-based approach in HCC.

Notably, patients with a high HMS subtype exhibited significantly poorer OS than those with a low HMS subtype across all cohorts examined. This consistent association across diverse patient populations underscores the potential clinical utility of the HMS as a prognostic biomarker in HCC. Moreover, the study’s findings suggest that the HMS may reflect the underlying biological characteristics and tumor aggressiveness, thereby influencing patient outcomes.

One of the most compelling findings was the differential response to treatment observed between the HMS subtypes. Patients classified as having a low HMS subtype demonstrated significantly improved OS and PFS when treated with the combination of atezolizumab and bevacizumab compared to sorafenib monotherapy. Conversely, patients with a high HMS subtype did not exhibit a significant difference in survival outcomes between the two treatment regimens. These results suggest that the HMS could potentially serve as a predictive biomarker for identifying patients more likely to benefit from the atezolizumab-bevacizumab combination therapy.

The biological basis for the observed differences between the HMS subtypes was further explored through various analyses. The high HMS subtype tumors exhibited a significantly higher probability of harboring HSC-like features, as evidenced by elevated expression of HSC markers such as AFP, KRT19, EPCAM, and SALL4. This association suggests that the heightened metabolic activity in the high HMS subtype might originate from genetic or genomic alterations specifically affecting HSCs within the tumor.

Ingenuity Pathway Analysis provided further insights into the biological processes enriched in the high HMS subtype tumors. Pathways associated with cancer metabolism, including ERK/MAPK signaling, translation elongation, RAC signaling, cell cycle checkpoint regulation, integrin signaling, mTOR signaling, and glucose metabolism, were prominently upregulated in this subtype. These findings align with the notion that the high HMS subtype is characterized by increased metabolic activity and proliferation, potentially contributing to its aggressive behavior and poor prognosis.

Interestingly, the study also revealed distinct mutational landscapes between the HMS subtypes. While no significant differences were observed in the overall mutation burden, the high HMS subtype exhibited a higher frequency of copy number alterations compared to the low HMS subtype. Additionally, mutations in TP53 and BAP1 genes were significantly enriched in the high HMS subtype, while mutations in CTNNB1, IL6ST, and ACVR2A genes were more prevalent in the low HMS subtype. These mutational patterns may influence the biological behavior and therapeutic response of each subtype, warranting further investigation.

The findings of this study have significant implications for the clinical management of HCC patients. The HMS could potentially serve as a prognostic biomarker, enabling risk stratification and informing treatment decisions. Moreover, its predictive value for identifying patients likely to benefit from the atezolizumab-bevacizumab combination therapy could aid in personalized treatment selection, optimizing outcomes, and minimizing unnecessary toxicities. Recent advancements in predicting drug response using single cell or spatial data can be utilized to predict signature-based clinical implication in the future.

However, it is essential to acknowledge the limitations of the study. While the HMS was consistently associated with prognosis across multiple cohorts, the study has potential biases due to retrospective design regarding patient selection and data analysis, and prospective validation in larger patient populations is warranted. Additionally, the underlying biological mechanisms driving the observed differences between the HMS subtypes require further elucidation. Functional studies investigating the role of HSCs, metabolic pathways, and specific genomic alterations in shaping the aggressive phenotype of the high HMS subtype could provide valuable insights and potential therapeutic targets.

Conclusion

This study presents compelling evidence for the clinical significance of the HMS in HCC. The HMS not only demonstrates a robust prognostic association but also shows potential as a predictive biomarker for response to the atezolizumab-bevacizumab combination therapy. The distinct biological characteristics and mutational landscapes observed between the HMS subtypes provide valuable insights into the underlying tumor biology and may guide the development of personalized treatment strategies. While further validation and mechanistic studies are needed, the HMS holds promise as a clinically actionable biomarker that could improve risk stratification, treatment selection, and ultimately, patient outcomes in HCC.

Data Sharing Statement

All genomic data are accessible to the public through the Gene Expression Omnibus data repository under accession numbers GSE14520, GSE36376, and GSE54236, and via the National Omics Data Encyclopedia under accession number OEP000321. TCGA data can be obtained from the cBioPortal website (https://www.cbioportal.org/). Gene expression data from the IMbrave150 and GO30140 studies are accessible in the European Genome-Phenome Archive under the accession number EGAD00001008128.

Author Contributions

All authors made a significant contribution to the work reported, whether that is in the conception, study design, execution, acquisition of data, analysis, and interpretation, or in all these areas; took part in drafting, revising or critically reviewing the article; gave final approval of the version to be published; have agreed on the journal to which the article has been submitted; and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work.

Disclosure

The authors report no conflicts of interest in this work.
