---
pmid: '41102501'
doi: 10.1007/s12016-025-09105-7
pmcid: PMC12532714
title: PD-1/PD-L1 Cancer Immunotherapeutics Reshape Tumor Microenvironment - Clinical
  Evidence and Molecular Mechanisms for AI-based Precision Medicine.
authors:
- Lin Yen-Yi
- Ding Jeak Ling
- Shen Hsieh-Tsung
- Lin Yu-Ming
- Adhidjaja Edeline Clarissa
- Chang Shu-Chun
journal: Clinical reviews in allergy & immunology
year: 2025
month: 10
volume: '68'
issue: '1'
pages: '91'
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s12016-025-09105-7.pdf
cited_by_count: 4
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Tumor Microenvironment
- B7-H1 Antigen
- Neoplasms
- Precision Medicine
- Programmed Cell Death 1 Receptor
- Immunotherapy
- Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors
- Animals
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome
- Protein Processing, Post-Translational
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- PD-L1
- Programmed cell death ligand 1
- Programmed cell death protein 1
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer Immunotherapy and Biomarkers
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- Tumor
- cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 2
icite_rcr: null
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
biology_processes:
- tme-stroma
resistant_states: []
pathway_targets: []
---

# PD-1/PD-L1 Cancer Immunotherapeutics Reshape Tumor Microenvironment - Clinical Evidence and Molecular Mechanisms for AI-based Precision Medicine.

## Abstract

PD-1 (Programmed cell death protein 1) located on T cells, binds to PD-L1 (Programmed cell death ligand 1) on cancer cells, to suppress T cell activation and enable immune evasion. Hitherto, reviews have mainly highlighted the role of PD-1/PD-L1 in anti-cancer immunomodulation, anti-cancer therapy resistance, and immune-related adverse events. However, there are critical modes of enhancement of therapeutic efficacy, which remain underappreciated. This review provides a holistic perspective on: (a) a comprehensive analysis of recent clinical trials targeting PD-1/PD-L1, specifically on the use of immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs); (b) the underlying molecular mechanisms of immune surveillance; (c) the role of ubiquitin-mediated post-translational modifications (PTMs, viz the ubiquitin machinery); and (d) the gut microbiome crosstalk with the PD-1/PD-L1 axis, which influences the tumor microenvironment (TME). Clarity gained from opinions exerted from these four factors, in this review, will provide insights on improving cancer prevention, diagnosis, and treatment, thus bridging translational research to the clinic. These standpoints will be presented with a view to advocating the integration of precision medicine with AI, to accelerate the discovery of more effective ICIs and enhance mono-/combinatorial drug strategies for PD-1/PD-L1-targeted therapy. Altogether, this review opines that AI-driven analytics will provoke an innovative impact on promoting clinical outcomes beneficial for cancer patients.

## Full Text

PD-1/PD-L1 Cancer Immunotherapeutics Reshape Tumor Microenvironment – Clinical Evidence and Molecular Mechanisms for AI-based Precision Medicine

PD-1 (Programmed cell death protein 1) located on T cells, binds to PD-L1 (Programmed cell death ligand 1) on cancer cells, to suppress T cell activation and enable immune evasion. Hitherto, reviews have mainly highlighted the role of PD-1/PD-L1 in anti-cancer immunomodulation, anti-cancer therapy resistance, and immune-related adverse events. However, there are critical modes of enhancement of therapeutic efficacy, which remain underappreciated. This review provides a holistic perspective on: (a) a comprehensive analysis of recent clinical trials targeting PD-1/PD-L1, specifically on the use of immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs); (b) the underlying molecular mechanisms of immune surveillance; (c) the role of ubiquitin-mediated post-translational modifications (PTMs, viz the ubiquitin machinery); and (d) the gut microbiome crosstalk with the PD-1/PD-L1 axis, which influences the tumor microenvironment (TME). Clarity gained from opinions exerted from these four factors, in this review, will provide insights on improving cancer prevention, diagnosis, and treatment, thus bridging translational research to the clinic. These standpoints will be presented with a view to advocating the integration of precision medicine with AI, to accelerate the discovery of more effective ICIs and enhance mono-/combinatorial drug strategies for PD-1/PD-L1-targeted therapy. Altogether, this review opines that AI-driven analytics will provoke an innovative impact on promoting clinical outcomes beneficial for cancer patients.

Supplementary Information

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s12016-025-09105-7.

Introduction- Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors (ICIs) Targeting PD-1/PD-L1 Axis are Effective Anti-Cancer Drugs

In the last few decades, immunotherapy has reshaped the landscape of cancer treatment, where PD-1 (Programmed cell death protein 1)/PD-L1 (Programmed cell death ligand 1) axis has emerged as a top target priority. The interaction between PD-1 and its ligand, PD-L1, results in effective suppression of immune surveillance by T cells, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Investigations on how PD-L1 manipulates the TME in cancer patients suggest this mechanism to be essential for consideration of cancer therapeutics. Of particular interest is how immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) target PD-1/PD-L1 signaling, which highlights ICIs as promising anti-cancer drugs.

The success of specific blockade of PD-1/PD-L1 by ICIs and restoration of T cell activity against cancer cells depends on the status of expression of PD-1 and PD-L1. Two metrics are used specifically to evaluate PD-L1 expression: tumor proportion score (TPS), which measures PD-L1 expression in tumor cells, and combined positive score (CPS), which accounts for PD-L1 expression in both tumor cells and the surrounding immune cells in the TME. Both TPS and CPS are predictive biomarkers of ICI efficacy, as high scores indicate better treatment response. Despite the potential clinical benefits, positive responses to PD-1/PD-L1 blockade therapy are still low in several cancers, with up to only 15% in general cases, and less than 50% in highly selected cohorts. Several factors are proposed to cause resistance to therapy, for example, the status of PD-L1 expression, TME condition, tumor immunogenicity, T cell dysfunction as well as gut microbiome patterns in patients. To enhance the efficacy of PD-1/PD-L1 blockade therapy, combinatorial treatments have been proposed, including nano-immunotherapy, and drugs targeting the ubiquitin machinery or gut microbiome management to improve clinical outcomes. The ubiquitin machinery is also purportedly involved in networks between the gut microbiome and carcinogenesis. Additionally, recent reviews have discussed the role of PD-1/PD-L1 in anti-cancer immune modulations, anti-cancer therapy resistance and immune-related adverse events. Nevertheless, there is still a lack of focus and precision on the role of the ubiquitin machinery and the potentials of gut microbiome involvement in the PD-1/PD-L1 axis. Here, we highlight the possibilities of anti-cancer strategies through targeting PTMs of PD-L1 and manipulating the gut microbiome. To this end, a better understanding of the recent FDA-approved drugs and an update on recent clinical trials are needed to gain clearer insights on the current progression of PD-1/PD-L1 related drug development. The potential roles of some gut microbes in crosstalk with the ubiquitin machinery and how they influence the TME will be deliberated in this review. Additionally, as a rapidly advancing field, AI-driven analytics demonstrate a transformative advancement in cancer diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment. The use of AI in anti-cancer drug discovery improves precision medicine by revealing biomarker characteristics that are essential for early detection and treatment of diseases based on vast and diverse datasets. Here, we will discuss and motivate the utilization of AI technologies on clinical data to query and improve ICI targeting of different cancers. Such technologies could provide clearer and specific linkage to ubiquitin machinery and gut microbiome crosstalk with the PD-1/PD-L1 axis which mediates the TME, hence refining and sharpening personalized precision medicine.

Recent Clinical Trials Targeting the PD-1/PD-L1 Axis

ICIs targeting the PD-1/PD-L1 are recognized as potent anti-cancer therapeutics. In this section, we discuss the current status of PD-1/PD-L1 ICI drugs. Also, up-to-date clinical trials using monotherapy and combinatorial treatments with PD-1/PD-L1 ICIs will be deliberated. Additionally, AI-driven analytics will be discussed with a view to enhancing the discovery of effective ICIs as well as the progression of precision immunotherapy.

To date, there are ten FDA-approved ICIs targeting PD-1/PD-L1, as summarized in Fig. 2, showing the timelines of approval. The ICIs include pembrolizumab, nivolumab, cemiplimab, dostarlimab, toripalimab, tislelizumab, atezolizumab, avelumab, durvalumab, and cosibelimab. Table 1 provides an update on the FDA-approved ICIs targeting PD-1/PD-L1 in different cancers. The relatively short chronology of approval indicates a rapid advancement of ICIs targeting PD-1/PD-L1. These drugs are mainly used against solid cancers, including melanoma, breast cancer (BRCA), non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and bladder cancer. Pembrolizumab, nivolumab, cemiplimab, atezolizumab, and durvalizumab significantly improve NSCLC outcomes across key settings. Pembrolizumab plus platinum/pemetrexed nearly doubles PFS in first-line non-squamous disease (8.8 vs 4.9 months); improves OS in first-line squamous with carboplatin + (nab-)paclitaxel (15.9 vs 11.3 months). As a monotherapy in high PD-L1 tumors, pembrolizumab prolongs OS both first line (30.0 vs 14.2 months) and post-platinum (PD-L1 ≥ 50%: 17.3 vs 8.2 months vs docetaxel). Nivolumab outperforms docetaxel after platinum progression and, combined with ipilimumab, benefits clinical outcomes in patients with TPS ≥ 1% and without EGFR/ALK mutations. Cemiplimab, with platinum chemotherapy in the first line, increases OS (21.9 vs 13.0 months), PFS (8.2 vs 5.0 months), and ORR (43% vs 23%). Atezolizumab improves outcomes across settings: it prolongs OS as a monotherapy in PD-L1–high metastatic disease (no EGFR/ALK). Atezolizumab also extends PFS as consolidation after chemoradiation in unresectable stage III and in selected metastatic settings, enhances response and survival when combined with platinum chemotherapy. Durvalizumab prolongs PFS and OS versus placebo. Other PD-1/PD-L1 targeting ICIs, including dostarlimab, toripalimab, tislelizumab, avelumab, and cosibelimab, show prolonged responses in selected indications.

Following FDA approval of the ICIs (Fig. 2 & Table 1), PD-L1-associated treatments have undergone more clinical trials for further applications, with a particular focus on patients with BRCA and NSCLC. BRCA and lung cancers, which are both linked to chronic inflammation, are among the most prevalent cancers in the United States in 2024, with BRCA being the most prominent global cancer among women. Along with prostate and colorectal cancers, they account for nearly 50% of all new cancer cases in 2024. Furthermore, studies have reported that approximately 83% of circulating tumor cells from patients with BRCA and NSCLC exhibit positive PD-L1 expression. PD-L1 positive expression on circulating tumor cells indicates a more effective ICI treatment and better survival prognosis.

PD-1/PD-L1 Monotherapy: Clinical Trials and AI-based Analytics

Phase II and III clinical trials with PD-1/PD-L1 monotherapy using pembrolizumab for treatment of BRCA and NSCLC showed better clinical response in NSCLC patients compared to BRCA patients, as shown in Table 2. The bar graph for key metrics, for example, objective response rate (ORR), median progression-free survival (mPFS), and median overall survival (mOS) is shown in Supplementary Figure S1 for better readability. Notably, in NSCLC treatment trials, patients were stratified into three groups based on TPS: TPS ≥ 1%, TPS ≥ 20%, and TPS ≥ 50%. In contrast, no TPS threshold was considered in the inclusion criteria for the BRCA trial. For NSCLC patients with increased TPS (≥ 50% vs. ≥ 1%), a higher ORR of over 39% vs. 27.2%, mPFS of over 6 months vs. 5.4 months, and mOS of 20 months vs. 16.4 months was observed, while treatment-related adverse events (TRAEs)—percentage of patients experiencing at least one episode of any untoward medical occurrence—present no significant difference among NSCLC and BRCA patients. Additionally, a reduced systemic treatment burden contributes to a more robust immune response and improved clinical outcomes with ICIs in both cancer types. 

Since TPS appears to be a critical indicator for better clinical outcomes in treatments with ICI, both IHC- and AI-based tools have been developed to detect the TPS of cancer patients under treatment. In 2015, the FDA approved the use of PD-L1 IHC 22C3 pharmDx as a companion diagnostic aid in identifying cancer patients eligible for pembrolizumab treatment. Beyond traditional immunohistochemistry assays, AI and digital pathology tools are being increasingly employed to enhance the accuracy and consistency of PD-L1 scoring. AI-enhanced automation of TPS evaluation minimizes the intra-observer and inter-observer variabilities while it improves diagnostic accuracy. Charifa et al. demonstrated strong linear correlations between PD-L1 mRNA levels analyzed by next generation sequencing and by IHC measurements. Machine learning models achieved high accuracies in predicting PD-L1 status, with “area under the curve” values ranging from 0.83 to 0.91 for various cutoffs. Kim et al. proposed an AI-powered PD-L1 TPS analyzer, demonstrating its reliable precision in predicting patient responses to ICIs, as measured by PFS. Hence, further development and wider application of AI-driven TPS assessment tools would refine patient selection, optimize the effectiveness of ICI therapies, and ultimately advance personalized precision cancer treatment.

Besides analyzing TPS values, the AI-driven models demonstrated robust performances in the prediction of responses to ICI by using H&E-stained images. Rakaee et al. developed Deep-IO (Input/Output), a deep learning–based response stratification model, to predict immunotherapy response in NSCLC patients. This multicenter cohort study revealed a robust and independent deep learning–derived feature that is significantly associated with ICI response clinically. Thus, Deep-IO can be integrated into clinical workflows to improve current immunotherapy and to aid treatment optimization. Additionally, Gschwind et al. developed a machine learning model to predict ICI response that integrates genomic and transcriptomic biomarkers. Forty-nine biomarkers derived from tumor-normal whole-exome and RNA sequencing served as input features for least absolute shrinkage and selection operator regression. Publicly available DNA and RNA-seq data from 449 melanoma patients, annotated with response evaluation criteria in solid tumor outcomes, were combined to form a meta-cohort for model training and validation. Decent performances were reportedly achieved, with a receiver operating characteristic area under the curve of 0.7 in training and 0.64 in testing. Together, these results demonstrated the feasibility and efficiency of predicting ICI responses via AI-driven models.

Clinical Trials of PD-1/PD-L1 Combinatorial Treatments and AI-driven Predictions on Drug Synergy, Efficacy and Toxicity

Unlike monotherapeutic strategies, PD-1/PD-L1 combinatorial treatments for BRCA using atezolizumab plus three different chemotherapy agents have demonstrated varying treatment efficacies, as shown in Table 3. The bar graph for key metrics (e.g., ORR, mPFS, and mOS) is shown in Supplementary Figure S2 for better readability. Among these combinatorial treatments, the combination with nab-paclitaxel shows the most favorable mOS, achieving 25 months. This is followed by paclitaxel (mOS: 22.05 months) and cobimetinib plus paclitaxel/nab-paclitaxel (mOS: < 16 months). Consistently, among combinatorial treatments for NSCLC, shown in Table 4, the combination of atezolizumab with carboplatin, pemetrexed, and bevacizumab showed particularly promising results, with a 20.43% improved mOS compared to the combination of atezolizumab, carboplatin, and nab-paclitaxel. These findings highlight the potential of combinatorial chemotherapy with ICIs to improve clinical outcomes for NSCLC and BRCA patients. The bar graph for key metrics (e.g., ORR, mPFS, and mOS) is shown in Supplementary Figure S3 for easier reference. 

The differing efficacies of nab-paclitaxel and paclitaxel highlight how the formulation and delivery method of the same active ingredient may result in varying therapeutic outcomes. Multi-agent regimens targeting multiple pathways may also enhance therapeutic efficacy. Therefore, future investigations into novel chemotherapy agents should consider alternative combinations with ICIs and multi-pathway inhibition strategies, which are anticipated to yield more promising results in cancer treatment. However, identifying effective combinatorial drug regimens remains challenging, as testing every possible drug combination is both costly and time-consuming. To address this, AI-driven machine learning approaches have been employed to predict optimal drug combinations by developing target inhibition networks that evaluate their synergy, efficacy, and toxicity. In addition, we propose the following steps to further improve cancer treatment outcomes: (a) clearer understanding of PD-L1-modulated TME, (b) PD-L1-associated ubiquitin machinery, (c) innovation of smart tools via AI approaches to assess PD-L1 expression levels, and (d) early implementation of ICI prior to systemic treatment of cancer patients, and the use of ICI combinatorials and multi-agent regimens with the aid of AI-driven machine learning approaches to enable prediction of the strategic timing of treatment and dosage regime. For the perspectives outlined above, we next discuss how PD-L1 interplays with TME, particularly PD-L1-associated molecular mechanisms in immuno-cancer surveillance, and where appropriate and helpful, we focus on how AI-based methods may accelerate the discovery of effective ICIs and enhance the progress of precision immunotherapy.

PD-L1 Associated Molecular Mechanisms in Immune Surveillance and the Potentials of AI to Address and Resolve Variabilities

The TME, which consists of a diverse array of cellular and non-cellular components, is a pivotal arena where immune cells interact and influence the efficacy of PD-L1-targeted therapies. Besides stromal cells within the TME, immune cells such as T cells, macrophages, dendritic cells (DCs), and tumor-associated neutrophils (TANs) are actively modulating cancer cells and contributing to the immunosuppressive landscape. Therefore, a better understanding of how PD-1/PD-L1 modulates immune cell interactions in the TME networks is essential for optimizing therapeutic strategies, as shown in Fig. 3 (also see Sect. "The role of immune cells in PD-L1 targeted treatment"). Furthermore, cell-free approaches deliberated in Sect. "Cell-free treatment approaches: antibodies as inhibitors and immunoconjugates" highlight the use of antibody inhibitors and immunoconjugates with the incorporation of innovative AI-based methods. These approaches will enhance anti-tumor immunity targeting the PD-1/PD-L1 axis. For instance, researchers have utilized AI-driven protein diffusion models to discover multiple anti-PD-1 antibody fragments. Here, we delve into the roles of immune cells in PD-L1 treatment and consider their potentials as novel cellular therapeutics.

The Role of Immune Cells in PD-L1 Targeted Treatment

T cells (Fig. 3, A) are primary targets of PD-L1-mediated immunosuppression. Both in vitro and in vivo studies revealed that anti-PD-L1 inhibitory antibodies counteract the effects of PD-L1 in tumor cells by facilitating the recognition of tumor antigens via T cell receptors, hence restoring T cell activation, proliferation, and effector functions. Consequently, T cells release cytolytic mediators, such as perforin and granzyme, which induce apoptosis in tumor cells. Moreover, studies conducted on pathologic specimens from colorectal cancer (CRC) patients showed that CD8+ CTL density and PD-L1 expression level in lymphocytes serve as prognostic indicators. CD8+ CTL density is associated with tumor invasion and distant metastases, while high PD-L1 expression in lymphocytes is associated with improved disease-free survival in CRC. In contrast, high PD-L1 expression in lymphocytes predicts poor outcomes in TNBC, potentially reflecting active immune responses in CRC versus immune dysfunction in TNBC. This underscores the complex and context-dependent interplay between the immune system and cancer, again prompting us to urge researchers to explore the use of AI tools to dissect and tease out anti-cancer strategies that could be unleashed. Notably, high TPS correlates with lymph node metastases and tumor-node-metastasis staging in an untreated context, but predicts better clinical outcomes with ICIs. In addition, TPS can be influenced by various therapeutic strategies. EGFR pathway inhibitors can down-regulate TPS, while DNA damaging agents, chemotherapeutic drugs, and radiation therapy can up-regulate TPS. Additionally, CRISPR/Cas9 knockout of PD-L1 in tumor cells was also reported to influence TPS by reducing 64% of PD-L1 on the cell surface. We propose that therapeutic modulation of TPS could serve as a potential clinical strategy. The complexity of the dual roles of TPS highlights the importance of tailoring TPS-targeted interventions to specific clinical scenarios. Notably, Yoo et al. introduced SCORPIO, a machine learning system designed to predict ICI-treatment outcomes using routine blood tests and standard clinical variables. Building on this, it is conceivable that AI has the potential to address variability in patient responses during treatment by continuously analyzing clinical data and adjusting therapeutic strategies in real time, thereby enhancing treatment precision and optimizing prognostic outcomes.

Macrophages (Fig. 3, B) are another key immune cell type of the TME that express high levels of PD-1 and PD-L1, contributing to the immunosuppressive milieu of the TME. Macrophages interact with T cells through the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway, shifting between M1 and M2 phenotypes. PD-L1 blockade in responsive tumor models can reprogram tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) towards M1, supporting anti-tumor immunity by increasing iNOS levels. In vitro studies demonstrated that PD-L1 blockade restores CAR T cell activity through IFN-γ-mediated regulation of macrophages, thus enhancing therapeutic efficacy. Furthermore, in vivo studies using a humanized mice model showed that the blockade of PD-L1 increases macrophage phagocytosis, which reduces tumor growth and extends survival, suggesting that an alternative mechanism through the combination of CAR T cells with ICIs may influence the TME to reshape the immune landscape of solid tumors to improve CAR T cell efficacy. Phase I and phase II clinical studies show synergistic efficacy; although challenges like toxicity remain. However, large-scale clinical tests are still lacking. Thus, advanced CAR T delivery systems and multi-checkpoint targeting are proposed for future multi-center clinical trials. Importantly, we reiterate the timeliness and value of employing AI tools for more efficient and precise ICI treatment outcomes.

Dendritic cells, DCs (Fig. 3, C), play critical roles in antigen presentation and T cell activation. Ex vivo studies indicate that silencing PD-L1 in DCs and PD-1 in T cells enhances the stimulatory functions of DCs. In vivo analyses using wild-type and DC-conditional PD-L1 knockout mice further showed that blocking PD-L1 significantly improves the ability of DCs to provoke effective T cell responses against tumor antigens. Neutrophils (Fig. 3, D) within the TME can also express PD-L1 and contribute to immune suppression. Kwantwi et al. further affirmed that TANs suppress T cell immunity, which can be reversed by PD-L1 blockade, and that blocking the PD-1/PD-L1 axis in neutrophil and T cell co-culture systems increases tumor cell susceptibility to neutrophil cytotoxicity. These research findings could be subjected to AI analytics to help promote their inclusion in future AI-mediated immunotherapy.

In sum, PD-1/PD-L1 associated TME may appear to be empirically complicated networks. Furthermore, PD-L1-mediated immunosuppression exerts its effects via various immune cells within the TME, e.g. (i) T cells provide cancer-killing via perforin and granzyme–induced apoptosis; (ii) M1 macrophages suppress cancer cells via phagocytosis; (iii) DCs activate T cells against tumor antigens; and (iv) TANs suppress T cell immunity. These interplays could be applied for the development/optimization of PD-1/PD-L1 ICIs. On the other hand, using PD-L1 antibodies in a cell-free context has been found to directly suppress the interaction between PD-L1 and PD-1. Such approaches are well-recognized to assess the potential of PD-L1 ICIs as a therapeutic target. Targeting the PD-1/PD-L1 axis with specific antibodies, as ICIs, could enhance anti-tumor immunity by reversing immune suppression and improving the efficacy of both cellular- and antibody-based therapies. Notably, the role of ICIs in mediating the impact of tumor cells on immune cells is discussed in Sect. "Introduction- Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) targeting PD-1/PD-L1 axis are effective anti-cancer drugs". With the advent of nanobodies and smart-antibodies, AI analytics could be powerful tools to accelerate the optimization of such ICI antibodies for precision medicine tailored for specific patients. Hereon, it is thus appropriate to consider treatment with PD-1/PD-L1 ICI specific antibody inhibitors and immunoconjugates (see Sect. "Cell-free treatment approaches: antibodies as inhibitors and immunoconjugates" below).

Cell-free Treatment Approaches: Antibodies as Inhibitors and Immunoconjugates

Recent studies using monoclonal antibodies (mcAb) against PD-L1, for cell-free treatment targeting PD-L1, show that inhibition of its interaction with PD-1 enhances tumor destruction. As of 2024, four mcAb ICIs targeting PD-L1, including atezolizumab, durvalumab, avelumab, and cosibelimab (Fig. 2 & Table 1), have been approved by the FDA. Furthermore, using anti-PD-L1 antibodies as carriers for toxic payloads such as toxins, drugs, enzymes, and radionuclides can enhance anti-cancer efficacy while minimizing systemic side effects caused by these payloads. This approach creates immunoconjugates, also known as antibody–drug conjugates. For instance, atezolizumab serves as a payload-carrier for chemotherapy agents such as monomethyl auristatin E and Doxorubicin, and photosensitizer Chlorin e6. Monomethyl auristatin E and Chlorin e6 payloads were identified through in vivo analyses, whereas Doxorubicin was reported from in vitro studies. Additionally, Zhang et al. demonstrated, in nude mice, that CUS245C, a type I ribosome-inactivating protein isolated from Cucurbita moschata, forms an effective immunoconjugate when combined with mcAb durvalumab. An intrathecal treatment with doses of 0.4 mg/kg and 0.8 mg/kg reduced the mean tumor weight by 55% and 67%, respectively, compared to control groups treated with PBS, supporting significant efficacy against PD-L1/SPC-A-1 lung cancer-derived xenografts. IRDye700DX (a silica-phthalocyanine dye) and melanocyte stimulating hormone have also been identified as payloads of avelumab based on in vivo studies.

Altogether, the exploration of PD-L1-targeted therapies using ICIs reveals significant potential in reshaping cancer treatment paradigms. On the other hand, TME is recently proposed to modulate PTMs. The functionality and expression of PD-L1 are modulated by PTMs, which also include phosphorylation, palmitoylation, and glycosylation, besides ubiquitination. The ubiquitin machinery is known to intensively modulate the stability, localization, and interaction between PD-L1 and PD-1, thereby impacting the effectiveness of PD-L1-targeted therapies. Therefore, it is conceivable that ubiquitination-mediated PTMs play a major role in controlling PD-L1 activities. It is thus pertinent and timely for us to focus on the role of the ubiquitin machinery on the regulation of PD-L1, although other PTMs cannot be excluded in our consideration of the modulation of PD-L1.

The Ubiquitin Machinery Modulates PD-L1 Function within the TME

The regulation of PD-L1 protein in cancer is tightly modulated by the ubiquitin-mediated PTMs, of which the Ubiquitin–Proteasome System (UPS) plays a pivotal regulatory role in carcinogenesis. As mentioned in Sect. "Cell-free treatment approaches: antibodies as inhibitors and immunoconjugates", the expression of PD-L1 on tumor cells is regulated by several PTM mechanisms. Specifically, ubiquitin-mediated PTM executes the process of ubiquitination via precise attachment and extension of ubiquitin molecules to the target proteins, such as PD-L1/PD-1 and other transcription factors which interact and regulate the PD-L1-associated TME networks. This review focusses on the impact of ubiquitination on PD-L1/PD-1. The UPS is facilitated by specific enzymes: the ubiquitin-activating enzyme (E1), ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (E2), and ubiquitin ligase (E3), marking targeted proteins for proteolysis via the 26S proteasomes. Among the key components of UPS, the E3 ligase performs the significant role of recognizing and presenting proteins for degradation, which decides the path for tumor promotion or tumor suppression in carcinogenesis.

E3 ligases are crucial in: (i) molecular modulation of cytokine production within the TME, which regulates cancer progression via the PD-1/PD-L1 expression, and (ii) cellular regulation of the various cell types in the TME including immune cells such as T cells, macrophages, dendritic cells, and neutrophils, as well as cancer-associated fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and extracellular matrix, as discussed in Sect. "The role of immune cells in PD-L1 targeted treatment". Uncontrolled ubiquitin machinery perturbs cellular microenvironment networks, which impairs the regulation of tumor progression, resulting in suppression of immune surveillance and hindrance of cancer eradication. Notably, E3 ligases facilitate the ubiquitination of PD-1 and PD-L1, which enhance T cell activity and increase cytokine production to suppress tumor cells. However, some other E3s, e.g., tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6), may act as tumor promoters by enhancing PD-L1 stability.

Henceforth, we highlight and consolidate recent studies reporting important roles of the key components of the UPS, the E3 ligases. Figure 4and Table 5 show how some prominent E3 ligases modulate PD-1/PD-L1 axes in the tumorigenic microenvironment.

E3 Ligases –Representative E3s which Modulate PD-1/PD-L1-associated TME

There are > 600 putative E3 ligases, which facilitate tremendous diversity of ubiquitin substrates in our system. In the context of this review, we highlight key E3 ligases which either directly or consequentially ubiquitinate and degrade PD-L1/PD-1-specific proteins, and hence modulate the PD-L1/PD-1-associated TME.

TRAF6, a pro-tumorigenic E3 ligase in melanoma, enhances PD-L1 expression through bonding with Transcription Factor CP2 (TFCP2). Wang et al. showed that TRAF6 stabilizes Yes-associated protein 1 (YAP1) via K63-linked ubiquitination, increases the formation of the YAP1/TFCP2 transcription complex, and hence elevates PD-L1 transcriptional levels. Furthermore, TRAF6 promotes the TME activity via cancer-associated fibroblasts. On the other hand, in vitro and retrospective studies showed that USP8 (a deubiquitinase) reduces TRAF6-mediated ubiquitination, resulting in negative regulation of PD-L1 protein levels. On the contrary, USP22 is a critical deubiquitinase that removes K6, K11, K27, K29, K33, and K63-linked ubiquitin chains from PD-L1, resulting in the stabilization of PD-L1 in NSCLC cells. Suppression of USP22 promoted T cell cytotoxicity and inhibited tumorigenesis. In contrast to earlier findings, the same study reported that TRAF6 upregulates MHC-I-dependent antigen presentation, suggesting that TRAF6 is potentially beneficial for anti-tumor immunity. Thus, although TRAF6 is recognized to be directly involved in the TME, further investigations with AI-driven approaches may enlighten us on how such dual opposing functionalities of E3 ligases may mediate PD-1/PD-L1 induced pro-/anti-tumorigenic activities in different cancers. For example, AI-driven molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulations predicting the binding site and binding affinity and behavior of ligands would improve the efficiency for discovery of key signaling pathways, thus revealing the role of TRAF6 in multiple cancers.

Membrane-associated RING-CH 8 (MARCH8) is a potent E3 ligase member responsible for PD-L1 degradation in NSCLC. Both in vitro and in vivo studies showed that MARCH8 promotes PD-L1 degradation through its N-terminal region. The suppression of MARCH8 rescued EGFR inhibitor (osimertinib)–induced PD-L1 reduction, indicating its tumor suppression ability. Concordantly, MARCH8 is associated with B cell maturation by targeting MHC class II molecules, thus offering MARCH8 as a drug lead/target for development and application for NSCLC patients. AI-driven analytics are required to explore underlying mechanisms that MARCH8 modulates PD-L1-associated TME; this will further refine the efficacy of the ICI drug.

Beta-transducing repeat-containing protein (β-TrCP) together with SKP1-CUL1-F-box protein forms the SCFβ−TrCP E3 complex. β-TrCP was recently proposed to be a critical immune checkpoint involved in shaping the TME through the ubiquitin machinery. β-TrCP stimulates PD-L1 degradation via the 26S proteasome, thus promoting cancer-killing effects. Interestingly, β-TrCP-mediated ubiquitination is promoted by GSK3β-induced phosphorylation, which is necessary for β-TrCP binding and subsequent ubiquitination. Additionally, in vivo studies showed that β-TrCP can be increased by sulforaphane, which further boosts β-TrCP-mediated PD-L1 degradation. By regulating the TME, sulforaphane further improved the antitumor ability of immunotherapy in cancer patients, such as inhibition of NSCLC metastasis, thus highlighting the clinical applications of β-TrCP/PD-L1 associated TME networks. Notably, recent studies demonstrated that machine learning and deep learning are effective diagnostic tools for the prediction of TME; hence, we urge the integration of AI into the clinical workflow of β-TrCP/PD-L1 associated therapy.

HECT, UBA and WWE domain-containing protein 1 (HUWE1) is a suppressor of BRCA. HUWE1 promotes polyubiquitination of PD-L1 at K281, targeting it for degradation of BRCA cells. Another PD-L1 post-translational modifier, TMUB1 (transmembrane and ubiquitin-like domain-containing protein 1), competes against HUWE1 for PD-L1. Knockdown of TMUB1 increased the expression of inflammatory cytokines associated with the TME, e.g., IFN-γ and TNF-α. Altogether, TMUB1 suppresses the antitumor immune response in the TME, making it a potential drug target for inhibition to modulate HUWE1/PD-L1.

FBXO22, another E3 ligase, suppresses NSCLC by promoting the PD-L1 ubiquitination and degradation, thus increasing the sensitivity of tumor cells to DNA damaging therapies such as ionizing radiation and cisplatin. FBXO22 needs to undergo phosphorylation at the S160 or S162 or both residues to facilitate PD-L1 ubiquitination and degradation. Notably, FBXO22 mediates prostate cancer metastasis by regulating macrophage polarization in vivo, indicating that FBXO22 modulates carcinogenesis through PD-L1–mediated TME networks.

Speckle-type POZ protein (SPOP) forms a complex with CUL3, which ubiquitinates and degrades PD-L1, leading to suppression of ovarian cancer in vivo. Interestingly, knockdown of SPOP significantly reduced the levels of TNF-α and IFN-γ, indicating the suppression of T cell activity in the TME. A preclinical study has shown that prostate cancer caused by SPOP mutations stabilized and predominantly activated the immunosuppressive STING1 in the TME. Thus, SPOP appears to be a critical factor in the regulation of macrophage- and TME-mediated signaling in prostate cancer.

Neuronal precursor cell expressed developmentally downregulated 4 (NEDD4) is a bladder cancer suppressor which interacts with PD-L1 and performs Lys48-linked polyubiquitination leading to PD-L1 degradation. FGFR3-induced NEDD4 phosphorylation enhances and accelerates NEDD4 ubiquitination and degradation. An in vivo knockout study of NEDD4 showed increased PD-L1 stability which inhibited the antitumor activity of CD8+ T-cells in FGFR3-activated tumor-bearing mouse models. Furthermore, NEDD4 also performs ubiquitination/degradation on PD-L1 in NSCLC, which enhances CD8+ T-cells and the anti-tumor immune response through IL-2 and INF-γ, thus suppressing carcinogenesis via the TME.

Constitutive photomorphogenesis protein 1 (COP1) destabilizes the transcription factor, c-Jun, by ubiquitinating and inhibiting the acetylation of the PD-L1 gene promoter to block its transcription. This suppresses NSCLC. Additionally, COP1 was found to indirectly decrease macrophage-associated chemokine secretion, which reduced infiltration of TAMs and created a more immunosuppressive TME in TNBC. Through the formation of a CUL4B-DDB1-COP1 complex, ubiquitination and degradation of the ubiquitously transcribed tetratricopeptide repeat on the X chromosome were reported to advance CRC progression.

F-box and WD repeat domain containing 7 protein (FBXW7) suppresses NSCLC by utilizing the Lys48-linked polyubiquitination on the Lys233 residue of PD-1 protein, thus reducing its interaction with PD-L1 protein and suppressing PD-L1-mediated immune evasion. Reduced levels of FBXW7 promote TNBC proliferation and metastasis, indicating poor prognosis of TNBC. FBXW7 functions through boosting IFN-γ signaling, accompanied by an elevation of immunosuppressive neutrophils within the TME. Consistently, knockdown of FBXW7 in macrophage cells activated M2 macrophage polarization and promoted cancer cell growth by boosting the TME. These results indicate that, as an effective modulator in the TME, FBXW7 is a promising target for cancer immunotherapies.

TRIM21, as a ubiquitin E3 ligase, was recently reported to catalyze the K63-linked ubiquitination at the K233 site of PD-1 that stabilized PD-1 through antagonizing its K48-linked ubiquitination and degradation. The suppression of TRIM21 has been reported to activate the cytotoxic CD8+ T cells and sensitize tumors to immunotherapy in BRCA cells.

Mind Bomb Homolog 2 (MIB2), unlike typical E3 ligases, mediates non-proteolytic K63-linked ubiquitination of PD-L1 at K136. Through Ras-associated binding 8-mediated exocytosis, MIB2 promotes PD-L1 trafficking from the Golgi complex to the plasma membrane. Thus, MIB2 increases PD-L1 surface expression and promotes its binding to PD-1. Additionally, suppression of MIB2 activates T cell-mediated cancer killing and enhances antitumor immunity, indicating that it is an effective modulator in the TME and a promising target for cancer immunotherapies.

With the diversity of E3 ligases, some of which display dual opposing functions, it is crucial to utilize AI methodologies to achieve precision in ICI development and cancer-type prediction and treatment. To this end, Sect. "The application of AI in design and validation of E3/UPS-mediated Proteolysis-Targeting Chimeras (PROTACs)" will consider the use of AI towards this goal, following a complete consideration in Sects. "E2 conjugating enzymes" and "E1 enzymes –collaborative roles with E2, E3 in the midst of diversity" below, on E2 and E1 enzymes, respectively, which collaborate with E3 ligases mentioned above.

E2 Conjugating Enzymes

E2 pairs with specific E3 ligases to transfer the ubiquitin molecule from the E1 enzyme to the target proteins, thus influencing cancer progression or suppression within the TME. For instance, TRAF6 pairs with an E2 Ubc13 to promote TRAF6-mediated polyubiquitination and modulation of the TME, resulting in IL-1β–induced signaling in CRC cells. Additionally, E3 MARCH8 functions together with E2 UBE2H to increase Lys63-linked polyubiquitination in vitro. The ubiquitination mediated by E3 ligase TRIM21 can be activated by the E2 enzymes, UBE2W and UBE2N/UBE2V2, which potentially leads to the activation of the proinflammatory response and suppression of the TME.

Altogether, the abovementioned findings indicate that understanding the precisions in specific E2–E3 pairings is urgently needed with a view to the future development of targeted cancer immunotherapeutics. Herewith, we reiterate the importance of employing AI to enhance and accelerate the precision medicine of TME-related anticancer activities. Specific AI methodology details will be discussed in Sect. "The application of AI in design and validation of E3/UPS-mediated Proteolysis-Targeting Chimeras (PROTACs)".

E1 Enzymes –Collaborative Roles with E2, E3 in the Midst of Diversity

Recent studies showed that the knockdown of UBA1, the ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1, decreases the proliferation of BRCA cells (MCF7 and MDA-MB231) and reduces the invasive ability of cancer cells. These findings indicate that UBA1 promotes a tumorigenic microenvironment in BRCA.

Overall, the diversity of E1, E2, E3 enzymes and the multiplicity of their pro- and/or anti- tumorigenic roles in the TME, are understandably intricate and overwhelming. Therefore, application of AI to predict and map hotspots of ubiquitination target and activities will help to narrow down the precise E3 ligase-target, the main player in the ubiquitin system, in the context of the cancer patient’s TME. This will likely decode the immune cell–cell crosstalk and predict the production of cancer-killing cytokines, thus providing precision in therapeutic outcome.

The Application of AI in design and validation of E3/UPS-mediated Proteolysis-Targeting Chimeras (PROTACs)

AI-driven organization of networks could provide ideal solutions to enable predictions and precision in the development of mono-/poly-functional drugs for optimal time and space of target and treatment regime.

PROTAC, which connects a target protein of interest to an E3 ligase, is recently highlighted as a therapeutic approach for its potential to degrade the targeted protein. Structurally, the PROTAC molecule is a heterobifunctional molecule composed of an E3-binding ligand, a target-binding ligand, and a chemical linker. Being an effective endogenous protein degradation tool, PROTAC can ubiquitinate the targeted proteins through the UPS to suppress carcinogenesis. The development of an efficient PROTAC involves a comprehensive and time-consuming process. However, AI tools are able to overcome complexities and improve the efficiency of PROTAC development towards drug discovery. By establishing a comprehensive pipeline approach, Chou et al. combined deep learning and structural biology to generate structurally diverse molecules to improve PROTACs’ drug design, focusing on E3 ligases such as Von Hippel–Lindau tumor suppressor, Cereblon, and Cellular inhibitor of apoptosis protein 1. Both intensive screening tools and quantitative evaluation are used for PROTAC design and validation to ensure optimum binding affinities of the selected candidates. Consistently, an AI-driven prediction tool is designed to predict PROTAC activity through chemical structures used for PROTAC drugs. Machine learning algorithms and molecular fingerprinting techniques are utilized with a varied set of PROTAC drug chemical structures and their corresponding biological activities chosen to train the tool. The study involved three main steps: preparing the data, extracting relevant features, and training the model. The resulting performances were very decent, with the receiver operating characteristic curve being better than 0.9 in various classifiers. Such a technique is expected to improve the efficacy and selectivity of AI-driven PROTACs.

In addition, the applications of PROTAC have been recently highlighted in gastrointestinal cancers, including pancreatic cancer, CRC, esophageal carcinoma, gastric cancer, hepatocarcinoma, and cholangiocarcinoma.

Gut Microbiota Modulate TME and Influence PD-1/PD-L1 Immunotherapy

The regulation of gastrointestinal inflammation is also mediated by the UPS, namely its rapid and specific response to stimuli at the gut through the PTM and degradation of key inflammatory effectors and regulators involved in the cellular microenvironment. A vast community of microbes (bacteria, viruses, fungi, and archaea) known as the commensal microbiome inhabits the human body, mainly at the large intestine, indicating the interaction between the UPS and gut microbiome. Therefore, it is requisite that we consider a more in-depth link between the gut microbiome and PD-1/PD-L1 and their influence on the TME.

The profile of the gut microbiome and the interaction between the gut microbes and E3 ligases are known to influence tumor suppression and immune homeostasis. For instance, propionate, a short-chain fatty acid produced by gut bacteria such as Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron and Collinsella aerofaciens, upregulates an E3 ligase, HECTD2, which suppresses CRC growth through proteasomal degradation of EHMT2. The loss of EHMT2 increases the expression of anti-tumorigenic TNFAIP1, which induces CRC apoptosis. Thus, the microbiome-derived short-chain fatty acids/metabolites may have therapeutic or collaborative leads against CRC. Additionally, Kathania et al. reported that the E3 ligase, Itch, is associated with alterations of the gut microbiota composition. The absence of Itch results in the expansion of colitogenic Bacteroides species, contributing to increased colonic inflammation with potential for CRC. This indicates the critical role of E3 ligases in regulating immune responses to the gut microbiota and their potential implications in inflammatory bowel diseases and CRC. Hereon, we discuss the potential involvement of various gut bacteria that are known to regulate the efficacy of PD-1/PD-L1-related therapies.

Bifidobacterium Longum (B. longum)

B. longum was suggested to impact the efficacy of immune-combined chemotherapy, with the analysis of 43 participants revealing distinct patterns in the composition of gut microbiota between responsive patients and non-responsive patients to anti-PD-1 therapy. B. longum generates short-chain fatty acids, which enhance epithelial barrier integrity and modulate DC function by upregulating IL-12 secretion, with minimized IL-10/IL-12 and IL-1β/IL-12 ratios and a relatively high TNFα/IL-10 balance. This, in turn, promotes CD4+ T helper cell type 1 responses. In addition, butyrate, the major metabolite of short-chain fatty acids, inhibits HDAC activity, inducing the expression of DNA-binding inhibitor via the IL-12 pathway and directly augmenting the anti-tumor function of CD8+ (cytotoxic) T cells. Based on this, we hypothesize that through this mechanism, B. longum enhances the anti-tumor efficacy of anti-PD-L1 therapy. Nevertheless, we propose that AI simulation of the gut bacteria profiles in different cancer patients would aid in optimizing gut bacteria manipulation alongside ICI treatment targeting PD-1, leading to improved treatment outcomes.

Faecalibacterium Prausnitzii (F. prausnitzii)

A retrospective study (n = 337) by Bredon et al. demonstrated that the population density of F. prausnitzii is associated with the clinical outcome of ICIs targeting PD-1 in patients with NSCLC and advanced melanoma. The principal metabolite produced by F. prausnitzii is butyrate, similar to that produced by B. longum. Accordingly, we hypothesize that F. prausnitzii modulates CD8+ T cell function via a similar mechanism. Consistently, Gao et al. reported that oral administration of F. prausnitzii in mice treated with combined checkpoint inhibition of CTLA-4 and PD-1 elevated IFN-γ and TNF-α levels in both CD4+ (helper) and CD8+ (cytotoxic) T cells, and this promoted the cancer cell killing property of cytotoxic T cells. Oral administration of F. prausnitzii in mice was reported to enhance gut microbial diversity and induce a separation in microbial communities by increasing beneficial probiotics and decreasing harmful pathogens. This modulation of the gut microbiome influences anti-cancer activities by enhancing immune responses in the TME and reducing proinflammatory pathogens.

Akkermansia muciniphila (A. muciniphila)

A. muciniphila is a key prognostic factor for PD-1 blockade in NSCLC patients. A retrospective analysis of n = 249 reported a significant association between high levels of A. muciniphila and upregulation of IFN-γ and IL-10 secreted by T cells and IL-12 secreted by DCs following PD-1 inhibition. Consistently, Zhu et al. reported that A. muciniphila modulates PD-L1 expression in neutrophils through the Atf3 pathway. Atf3 plays vital roles in modulating metabolism, immunity, and oncogenesis in various cancers. Furthermore, a fecal microbiota transplantation without A. muciniphila produces mice that are resistant to anti-PD-1 antibodies, supporting the potential role of A. muciniphila on PD-1 associated anti-cancer therapy.

Enterococci

Higher levels of Enterococci were found to be associated with better clinical outcomes in PD-L1-based immune therapy (n = 100). Consistently, Griffin et al. reported that in mice, Enterococci upregulates the transcription factors, NF-κB and MAPK, which drive the expression of immune mediators in the TME such as Il1b, Nlrp3, and IL-1β. Hence, immune signaling and responses to cancer immunotherapy are boosted by the Enterococci. Altogether, the abovementioned studies indicate that B. longum, F. prausnitzii, A. muciniphila, and Enterococci promote immune surveillance and enhance the treatment efficacy of PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors. Through oral administration, fecal transplantation, or other gut microbiome manipulation strategies, the patient treatment outcomes may be enhanced and optimized.

Future incorporation of AI to delineate specific and/or interactive and cooperative pathways mediated by the gut microbiome may further enable precision in PD-1/PD-L1 targeted anti-cancer therapy. Currently, AI is capable of analyzing complex datasets to identify distinct microbial signatures and map interactions between the gut microbiome and the host immune system.

Overall, we elaborated on how microbial metabolites modulate the therapeutic response of ICIs with a mechanistic chain of selected microbes such as B. longum, F. prausnitzii, and A. muciniphila—from the microbiome to signaling to PD-1/PD-L1 modulation to therapeutic response. Integrating AI with sequencing techniques (e.g. amplicon sequencing and shotgun sequencing) would improve clinical database analysis. In sum, these results demonstrate the potential of AI to guide personalized immunotherapy strategies and improve precision treatment efficacy.

Future Perspectives: Integrating Precision Medicine with AI through the PD-1/PD-L1 axis

Identification of novel/effective UPS factors, for example, E3 ligases. The identification of novel E3 ligases and the appearance/disappearance of their variant forms at progressive stages of cancers needs to be performed for their potential interactions with PTMs. Insights from these research strategies would help to refine the modulation of the PD-1/PD-L1 axis in the TME. For instance, phosphorylation of PD-1 enhances its interaction with USP5, a deubiquitinase that counteracts ubiquitination and stabilizes PD-1 expression in T cells.

Investigation of intercommunications between gut microbiome and E3 ligases: Studies on crosstalk between gut microbes and E3s involved in the TME would be useful for the development of novel and specific therapeutic tactics. In addition, manipulating the gut microbiome against treatment resistance in patients could enhance their treatment efficacy. For instance, a phase I clinical trial has demonstrated that transplantation of fecal microbiota from ICI-responsive patients into non-responders restored sensitivity to anti-PD-1 therapy, highlighting it as a potential treatment strategy to overcome resistance and improve immunotherapy outcomes.

Discovery of novel immunomodulators of the TME: Novel immune modulators may introduce critical immune regulatory mechanisms against cancer. Besides traditional experimental biology and computational approaches, an AI-driven biomarker discovery workflow is emerging as a transformative tool in precision medicine. The integration of genomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic data, processed through AI-driven hubs utilizing feature selection, clustering models, and classification models, enables the identification of novel biomarkers and therapeutic targets. Furthermore, combining modulators that target synergistically with PD-1/PD-L1 ICIs could facilitate modulation of the TME and enhance anti-cancer effects. The potentials of AI-driven approaches are proposed in optimizing immunomodulatory strategies within the TME.

Incorporating AI techniques into precision medicine: Besides the discovery and applications of ICIs for the treatment of cancer patients, AI algorithms can improve cancer risk prediction by creating mass screening methods. It can also aid in predicting treatment outcomes by analyzing pathology profiles and imaging studies. This predictive capability will undoubtedly accelerate the clinical trial process.

Precision medicine is an innovative strategy which applies biomedical and health informatics databases to guide accurate decisions and informed predictions for patients’ medical management. Since PD-1 and PD-L1 are widely expressed in various cell types, the integration of precision medicine into the PD-1/PD-L1 therapeutics holds great promise for the prevention, early diagnosis, and treatment of cancers. We propose several viewpoints to more precisely investigate PD-1/PD-L1, in particular, to utilize AI to achieve better clinical outcomes in the future, as summarized in Fig. 5. These include:

Figure 6 schematizes future perspectives on AI-driven analytics motivated for ICI response prediction, E3 target prediction, and gut microbiome manipulation, all of which are tightly associated with TME development. Such studies will promote the discovery of effective ICIs and clinical outcome prediction for mono-/combinatorial therapeutics in personalized immunotherapy, particularly, to help overcome drug resistance and TRAEs.

The development of comprehensive AI networks that integrate diverse data sources—such as genomic, clinical, and imaging data—can enhance the accuracy and reliability of these predictions. Machine learning algorithms, particularly deep learning models, have the potential to perform multimodal integration via multi-task learning. Strategically, AI simulation could be used to identify specific E2 and E3 enzymes involved in different stages of cancer progression. Such applications would improve precision medicine in early cancer diagnosis and treatment. However, key challenges persist, e.g., balancing interpretability with model complexity, addressing small sample sizes relative to variable counts, and establishing standardized benchmarking datasets to enable validation and comparison of models. In addition, the quality of data which may be influenced by over-/under-fitting, and biases affecting disadvantaged populations would undermine safety and equitable integration of AI into clinical workflow. In conclusion, by focusing on integrating precision medicine with AI tools within the PD-1/PD-L1 therapeutic framework, more specific and effective strategies may be developed to further improve cancer prevention, diagnosis, and targeted personalized treatment. Finally, technological advances in concert with the speed of AI development are anticipated to lead to sharper insights on precision medicine to elevate the PD-1/PD-L1 therapeutic landscape.

All authors concur with the submission. No part of this paper has been published or is being considered for publication elsewhere.

Abbreviations

BRCA

Breast cancer

COP1

Constitutive photomorphogenesis protein 1

CPS

Combined positive score

CRC

Colorectal cancer

CSCC

Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma

DC

Dendritic cell

dMMR

Mismatch repair deficient

E1

Ubiquitin-activating enzyme

E2

Ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme

E3

Ubiquitin ligase

FBXW7

F-box and WD repeat domain-containing 7 protein

HCC

Hepatocellular carcinoma

HUWE1

HECT, UBA and WWE domain-containing protein 1

ICI

Immune checkpoint inhibitor

MARCH8

Membrane-associated RING-CH 8

mcAb

Monoclonal antibodies

MIB2

Mind Bomb homolog 2

(m)TNBC

(Metastatic) triple-negative breast cancer

mOS

Median overall survival

mPFS

Median progression-free survival

NEDD4

Neuronal precursor cell expressed developmentally downregulated 4

NSCLC

Non-small cell lung cancer

ORR

Objective response rate

PD-1

Programmed cell death protein 1

PD-L1

Programmed cell death ligand 1

PTM

Post-translational modification

RCC

Renal cell carcinoma

SCLC

Small cell lung cancer

SPOP

Speckle-type POZ protein

TAN

Tumor-associated neutrophil

TFCP2

Transcription factor CP2

TMUB1

Transmembrane and ubiquitin-like domain-containing protein 1

TME

Tumor microenvironment

TRAE

Treatment-related adverse event

TRAF6

Tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6

TPS

Tumor proportion score

UC

Urothelial carcinoma

UPS

Ubiquitin proteasome system

YAP1

Yes-associated protein 1

β-TrCP

Beta-transducing repeat-containing protein

Publisher's Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author Contribution

YYL: Writing – original draft. JLD: Writing – review and editing, and Funding acquisition. HTS: Investigation and Funding acquisition. YML: Investigation and Funding acquisition. ECA: Prepared the Figs. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. SCC: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing, and Funding acquisition. All authors have read and approved the manuscript.

Funding

This work was jointly supported by the National Science and Technology Council, Taiwan (NSTC 112–2314-B-038–134, NSTC 114–2314-B-038–107-MY3); Taipei Medical University, Taiwan (A-0001574) and the National University of Singapore (Grant WBS: H-154–00-000019).

Competing Interests

The authors declare no competing interests.
