---
pmid: '41222719'
doi: 10.1007/s00262-025-04195-w
pmcid: PMC12612327
title: A matrix stiffness gene signature identifies SLC20A1 as a novel mechano-immunological
  checkpoint enabling synergistic immunotherapy in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
authors:
- Zhao Chuanbing
- Lu Yu
- He Long
- Zhang Yunpeng
- Yin Tao
journal: 'Cancer immunology, immunotherapy : CII'
year: 2025
month: 11
volume: '74'
issue: '12'
pages: '367'
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00262-025-04195-w
cited_by_count: 0
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Carcinoma, Pancreatic Ductal
- Pancreatic Neoplasms
- Immunotherapy
- Animals
- Mice
- Prognosis
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- bispecific-antibody
- immunotherapy
cancer_types:
- pancreatic
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- CD8
- PD-L1
- SLC20A1
- STAT3
- TGF-beta
- TGF-beta1
drugs:
- BiTP
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Pancreatic and Hepatic Oncology Research
diseases_annotated:
- PDAC
- pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
- tumor
mutations:
- Y101D
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 0
icite_rcr: null
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
biology_processes: []
resistant_states: []
pathway_targets: []
---

# A matrix stiffness gene signature identifies SLC20A1 as a novel mechano-immunological checkpoint enabling synergistic immunotherapy in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

## Abstract

Matrix stiffness is a defining feature of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and drives malignant progression through mechanisms that remain poorly understood. Using an ensemble machine learning approach, we integrated multiomics data from 886 patients with mechano-biology models to develop a nine-gene matrix stiffness-associated gene signature (MSAGS). MSAGS demonstrated superior prognostic accuracy in independent cohorts, outperforming 87 existing signatures. We identified SLC20A1 within MSAGS as a novel mechano-immunological checkpoint where matrix stiffness activates an SLC20A1-STAT3 positive feedback loop, driving dual immunosuppression via TGF-β1-mediated CD8+ T-cell exclusion and PD-L1-induced T-cell dysfunction. Importantly, targeting SLC20A1 synergized with anti-PD-L1/TGF-beta bispecific antibody (BiTP, Y101D), enhancing tumor suppression and extending survival in orthotopic PDAC models by increasing the infiltration and function of cytotoxic CD8+ T cells. This work establishes MSAGS as a clinically translatable prognostic tool and positions SLC20A1 targeting as a transformative strategy to overcome PDAC immunotherapy resistance, thereby repositioning matrix stiffness as a druggable target.

## Full Text

A matrix stiffness gene signature identifies SLC20A1 as a novel mechano-immunological checkpoint enabling synergistic immunotherapy in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma

Matrix stiffness is a defining feature of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and drives malignant progression through mechanisms that remain poorly understood. Using an ensemble machine learning approach, we integrated multiomics data from 886 patients with mechano-biology models to develop a nine-gene matrix stiffness-associated gene signature (MSAGS). MSAGS demonstrated superior prognostic accuracy in independent cohorts, outperforming 87 existing signatures. We identified SLC20A1 within MSAGS as a novel mechano-immunological checkpoint where matrix stiffness activates an SLC20A1-STAT3 positive feedback loop, driving dual immunosuppression via TGF-β1-mediated CD8+ T-cell exclusion and PD-L1-induced T-cell dysfunction. Importantly, targeting SLC20A1 synergized with anti-PD-L1/TGF-beta bispecific antibody (BiTP, Y101D), enhancing tumor suppression and extending survival in orthotopic PDAC models by increasing the infiltration and function of cytotoxic CD8+ T cells. This work establishes MSAGS as a clinically translatable prognostic tool and positions SLC20A1 targeting as a transformative strategy to overcome PDAC immunotherapy resistance, thereby repositioning matrix stiffness as a druggable target.

Graphical abstract

Supplementary Information

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s00262-025-04195-w.

Introduction

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the most aggressive malignancy of the digestive system, with a persistently low five-year survival rate below 13%. This poor prognosis arises not only from early tumor invasion and metastasis but also from two critical limitations: the lack of dynamic prognostic biomarker systems and the persistent failure of therapies targeting the tumor microenvironment to overcome immune resistance.

A pathognomonic feature of PDAC is its dense, fibrotic stroma, which distinguishes it from most other solid tumours. Recent studies have shown that cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) remodel the extracellular matrix (ECM) to generate progressively elevated stromal stiffness, which mechanistically reprograms PDAC gene expression patterns through mechano-transduction pathways. However, the regulatory networks that control these stiffness-responsive genes remain poorly defined, significantly impeding the development of precision therapies that target the mechano-microenvironment.

The clinical translation of matrix stiffness as a biomarker for tumor evolution requires further investigation. While stromal stiffness has been validated for risk stratification in colorectal cancer, its application in PDAC is hampered by major challenges: the invasive nature and spatial heterogeneity associated with in vivo stiffness measurement, and the inability of single mechanical parameters to capture the biological complexity of tumors. These limitations highlight the urgent need to develop multidimensional prognostic biomarkers based on stiffness-responsive genes. Although multigene signatures have demonstrated superior predictive power over traditional TNM-stage in multiple malignancies, a multiomics biomarker system specifically designed for mechano-microenvironment of PDAC has not yet been established.

However, key mechanistic gaps remain in our understanding of how matrix stiffness is transduced into biological effects. Emerging studies have highlighted several key pathways. For example, matrix stiffness can promote PD-L1 membrane localization through the IGF2BP2-SGMS2 axis, thereby facilitating immune evasion. Similarly, the Wnt/β-catenin/TCF4 signaling cascade has been linked to stiffness-induced, CLIC1-mediated metabolic reprogramming. While these findings provide crucial insights into PDAC mechano-biology, two areas require prioritization: the systematic elucidation of stiffness-responsive gene regulatory dynamics, and the identification of core mechano-transduction hubs along with their downstream effectors to guide therapeutic discovery.

This study aims to address key research gaps through three principal contributions. First, we constructed a matrix stiffness-associated multigene prognostic signature (MSAGS), which demonstrates prognostic accuracy superior to that of conventional PDAC staging systems. Building on this, we identified SLC20A1 as a novel mechano-immunological checkpoint that drives immunosuppression through a STAT3-TGFB1/PD-L1 axis. Ultimately, we developed a mechano-immunological combination therapy and provided preclinical evidence of its efficacy in synergistically overcoming treatment resistance. Collectively, this work establishes a biomechanical framework for PDAC risk stratification, reveals a fundamental mechanism of mechano-driven immune evasion, and proposes a combination strategy to overcome therapeutic resistance in PDAC.

Methods and materials

Data acquisition and curation from public genomic repositories‌

Transcriptomic profiles and clinical metadata from pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma patients were systematically curated from The Cancer Genome Atlas Pancreatic Adenocarcinoma (TCGA-PAAD) project, ArrayExpress (E-MTAB-6134), International Cancer Genome Consortium cohorts (PACA-AU and PACA-CA), and Gene Expression Omnibus datasets (GSE79668, GSE78229, GSE62452, GSE28735). Raw microarray data from GEO were normalized using the robust multi-array average (RMA) pipeline implemented in the “limma” R package (v3.54.0), incorporating background adjustment and quantile normalization. For cross-platform data integration, batch effect correction was performed via the empirical Bayes-based ComBat algorithm in the “sva” R package (v3.42.0), with adjustment for key technical covariates including sequencing platform (Illumina HiSeq 2500 vs. Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array), tissue procurement center, and sample preparation batch.

Screening of matrix stiffness-regulated prognostic biomarkers and development of a multimodal predictive model‌

Univariate Cox proportional hazards regression analysis was performed on matrix stiffness-regulated genes across four independent cohorts (GSE78229 [GEO], E-MTAB-6134 [ArrayExpress], ICGC-PACA-AU [ICGC], and GSE28735 [GEO]) with selection criteria of P < 0.05 and absolute hazard ratio (HR) > 1. Genes demonstrating consistent prognostic associations (concordant HR directionality) in at least three cohorts were retained as candidate biomarkers.

A total of 95 integrated models were constructed in the GSE62452 discovery cohort using integrated machine learning algorithms based on random survival forest (RSF), supervised principal components (SuperPC), LASSO, ridge, elastic net (Enet), survival support vector machine (SurvivalSVM), and CoxBoost. Hyperparameter optimization was conducted via five-fold cross-validation to develop the matrix stiffness associated gene signature (MSAGS) based on stiffness-associated genes. External validation was performed in eight independent cohorts (GSE78229, E-MTAB-6134, ICGC-PACA-AU, and GSE28735) with mean concordance index (C-index) as the primary performance metric.

The predictive accuracy of MSAGS for 1-/2-/3-year overall survival (OS), disease-specific survival (DSS), and progression-free interval (PFI) were evaluated using time-dependent receiver operating characteristic curves (AUC) implemented in the “timeROC” package (v0.4) according to nine cohorts: GSE62452, GSE78229, E-MTAB-6134, ICGC-PACA-AU, TCGA-PAAD, ICGC-PACA-CA, GSE28735, and GSE79668.

To systematically identify published PDAC prognostic signatures, a comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed (search cutoff: August 2023). To ensure transparency and methodological homogeneity in our comparative analysis, the risk score for each PDAC patient sample across the five validation cohorts (GSE62452, GSE78229, E-MTAB-6134, ICGC-PACA-AU, and GSE28735) was calculated based on the original model formula reported in each respective study—specifically, as the sum of the product of gene expression levels and their corresponding coefficients. The predictive performance of each model for PDAC prognosis was evaluated using Harrell’s concordance index (C-index) implemented in the “pec” R package (v2023.04.12). Detailed information of the existing models, including gene names and coefficients used in each prognostic signature, is provided in the Supplementary Materials.

Quantitative real-time PCR

Total RNA isolation was performed with TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen, #15,596,026). cDNA synthesis was subsequently conducted using the PrimeScript RT Reagent Kit (Takara, #RR047A). qRT-PCR analysis was executed on a QuantStudio 6 Pro platform employing 2X SYBR Green Master Mix (Thermo Fisher, #4,309,155), with ACTB serving as the endogenous control. Relative quantification of target genes was calculated via the 2 − ΔΔCt method. All primer sequences are documented in Supporting Information Table S2.

Western blotting

Protein lysates were extracted using RIPA buffer, with total protein concentration quantified by Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (#23,225, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Denatured samples were resolved on 10% SDS–polyacrylamide gels and electrophoretically transferred to PVDF membranes (#IPVH00010, Millipore). Membranes were blocked and incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies against: β-actin (#AC026, ABclonal, Dilution Ratio: 1:100,000), SLC20A1 (#A03537-1, BOSTER, Dilution Ratio: 1:1500), TGF-β1 (#A25313, ABclonal, Dilution Ratio: 1:800), STAT3 (#10,253–2-AP, Proteintech, Dilution Ratio: 1:12,000), phospho-STAT3 (Tyr705, #9145S, Cell Signaling Technology, Dilution Ratio: 1:1500), and PD-L1 (#66,248–1-Ig, Proteintech, Dilution Ratio: 1:5000). After washing, membranes were probed with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibodies: goat anti-mouse (#BA1038, BOSTER, Dilution Ratio: 1:50,000) and goat anti-rabbit (#BA1039, BOSTER, Dilution Ratio: 1:50,000). Protein bands were visualized using ECL Substrate (#AR1191S, BOSTER) and imaged with a ChemiDoc MP Imaging System (Bio-Rad).

CCK-8 assay

KPC cells were seeded in 96-well plates at a density of 3 × 103 cells per well, and cell viability was measured using the Cell Counting Kit-8 (Sigma-Aldrich, Shanghai, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining

Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues were sectioned at 5 μm thickness for hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining and immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis. For IHC, sections were deparaffinized in xylene, rehydrated through a graded ethanol series, and subjected to antigen retrieval using 0.1% Triton X-100 for membrane permeabilization. Non-specific binding was minimized through blocking with appropriate serum. Primary antibodies against SLC20A1 (#A03537-1, BOSTER, Dilution Ratio: 1:300), PD-L1 (#66,248–1-Ig, Proteintech, 1: 1500), TGFB1 (#A25313, ABclonal, Dilution Ratio: 1:5000), and phospho-STAT3 (Tyr705, #9145S, Cell Signaling Technology, Dilution Ratio: 1:100) were applied, followed by incubation with HRP-conjugated secondary antibody (#SD3100, Celnovte) at 37 °C for 20 min in darkness. Stained sections were visualized and imaged using an Olympus BX53 upright microscope.

Immunofluorescence staining.

Tumor tissues from mice were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin at 4 °C overnight, followed by paraffin embedding and sectioning at 4 μm thickness. Deparaffinized sections were rehydrated through graded ethanol series and rinsed with PBS. Antigen retrieval was performed using pressurized heating in MXB epitope retrieval solution (MVS-0101) with 20-min boiling under high pressure, followed by natural cooling to room temperature (RT). Sections were blocked with 5% goat serum in PBST for 1 h at RT, then incubated with primary antibodies against IFNG (#15,365–1-AP, Proteintech, Dilution Ratio: 1:500) and CD8A (#66,868–1-Ig, Proteintech, Dilution Ratio: 1:30,000) diluted in PBST containing 1% goat serum at 4 °C overnight in a humidified chamber. After PBS washing, sections were incubated with Alexa Fluor 488/594-conjugated secondary antibodies (Invitrogen, A11008/A11005, 1:500) for 1 h at RT protected from light, followed by nuclear counterstaining with DAPI (Beyotime, #C1005). Fluorescence images were acquired using a Nikon Eclipse Ti2 inverted fluorescence microscope.

Generation of stable Slc20a1 knockout cell lines‌

Stable Slc20a1 knockout KPC-A894 cells (designated Slc20a1-KO) were generated using lentiviral-mediated CRISPR-Cas9 system. Target-specific sgRNA oligonucleotides were annealed and cloned into BsmBI-digested lentiCRISPR v2 vector (Addgene #52,961, Cambridge, MA, USA), with non-targeting sgRNA (sgNT) serving as control. Lentiviral packaging plasmids pMD2.G and psPAX2 (Addgene) were co-transfected with the modified lentiCRISPR v2 vector into 293 T cells via polyethyleneimine (PEI) reagent. Viral supernatants were harvested 48 h post-transfection, filtered through 0.45 μm membranes, and used to transduce KPC- A894 cells for 24 h. Stable pools were selected with 5 μg/mL puromycin (Servicebio # G4017-1ML) for 7 days. Knockout efficiency was confirmed by both Western blot analysis and targeted amplicon sequencing of genomic loci. All sgRNA primer sequences are provided in Supplementary Table S1.

Cell lines culture‌

The KPC-A894 murine PDAC cell line was derived from spontaneous pancreatic tumors of Pdx-cre; LSL-Kras < sup > G12D < /sup > ; Trp53 < sup > R172H < /sup > (KPC) genetically engineered mice. BxPC3, PANC-1, and 293 T cell lines were obtained from the Cell Bank of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS, Shanghai, China). All cell lines were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 100 IU/mL penicillin/streptomycin antibiotics, maintained at 37 °C in a humidified 5% CO < sub > 2 < /sub > incubator. Mycoplasma contamination was routinely excluded using MycoAlert PLUS detection kit (Lonza).

PDAC cell culture under varied substrate stiffness

To investigate the effects of matrix stiffness on PDAC cells, BxPC3 and PANC-1 cell lines were cultured in CytoSoft® imaging 6-well plates (Advanced Bio Matrix, USA). These plates feature tunable-stiffness silicone substrates with elastic moduli preset at 2 kPa and 32 kPa. Prior to cell seeding, plates were coated with 3 mg/mL human type I collagen solution (VitroCol™, Advanced Bio Matrix). The stock solution was diluted to 15 μg/mL using 1 × DPBS, and 3 mL of this working solution was applied per well to ensure complete surface coverage. Coated plates were incubated at room temperature with lids on for 1 h, followed by three gentle washes with 3 mL PBS per well. PDAC cells were then seeded at a density of 1.5 × 10 < sup > 5 < /sup > cells/mL onto substrates of defined stiffness. After 3–5 days of culture, cells were harvested for RNA or protein extraction.

siRNA knockdown of SLC20A1

SLC20A1-targeting siRNA was procured from Qinke Biotechnology (Shanghai, China). Transient transfection of PANC-1 and BxPC3 cells was performed using Lipo8000 transfection reagent (Beyotime, #C0533) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, with siRNA complexes prepared at optimized concentrations. Protein expression levels of SLC20A1 were quantified by Western blot to validate knockdown efficiency in 72 h post-transfection.

Patient-derived organoid culture under different matrix stiffness conditions

The human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma organoid kit was supplied by Great Oak Technology. In strict accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol, resected tumor tissues were finely minced and digested for 60 min at 37 °C in complete medium containing 1 mg/mL Collagenase XI, 10 μg/mL DNAse I, and 10.5 μM ROCK inhibitor Y-27632 under gentle agitation, followed by mechanical dissociation. After washing, cells were embedded in Matrigel® and cultured in organoid-specific complete medium. During patient-derived organoid (PDO) establishment, medium was refreshed periodically with passaging performed as required for expansion. When organoids reached ≥ 5 continuous passages with stable growth status, they were resuspended in complete medium. Organoid models with varying substrate stiffness were constructed by adjusting the organoid suspension-to-Matrigel® ratio (1:1 and 1:4). All organoid models utilized in this study were isolated, cultured, and subjected to routine mycoplasma testing in the General Surgery Laboratory of Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology. After 5 days of culture under differential stiffness conditions, organoids were harvested and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for subsequent analysis. The successful establishment of organoid models with distinct stiffnesses was confirmed by measuring their Young’s moduli. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements yielded values of 2 kPa and 32 kPa for the two models, respectively.

Establishment of orthotopic pancreatic transplantation tumor models

Six- to eight-week-old male C57BL/6 J mice (6 per group) were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection of 1.25% tribromoethanol (Nanjing Aibei Biotechnology, 20 μL/g body weight). The left abdominal surgical area was shaved and disinfected with 75% ethanol.

KPC-A894 cells were resuspended in ice-cold PBS at a density of 1.5 × 104 cells/µl; 20 μL of the cell suspension was injected into the exposed pancreatic tail. For the control and Y101D-treated groups, wild-type cells were used, whereas for the KO- SLC20A1 groups, SLC20A1 stable knockout cells were used.

After injection, the abdominal wall was disinfected with 75% ethanol post-injection and closed in layers with 5–0 silk sutures. In the established PDAC mouse models, Y101D treatment was initiated on day 8 after modeling for both the Y101D treatment group and the KO SLC20A1 plus Y101D combination group. Y101D (Wuhan YZY Biopharma, Wuhan, China) was administered intraperitoneally at 20 mg/kg every other day, for a total of three injections.

Matrix stiffness-controlled orthotopic PDAC engraftment model in C57BL/6 J mice

C57BL/6 male mice (n = 6 per group) were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of 1.25% with 1.25% tribromoethanol (20 μL/g body weight). Following depilation of the left abdominal surgical field, the incision site was disinfected with 75% ethanol.

GM60 GelMA series (Suzhou Yongqinquan Co.) were prepared as concentrations of 5% and 15%, with stiffnesses of 3 kPa and 20 kPa, respectively, and incubated in a light-protected 37 °C metal bath.

KPC-A894 cells were mixed with GelMA at a density of 1.5 × 104 cells/μL following established protocols; for the soft- and stiff-controlled groups, wild-type cells were used, whereas for the KO Slc20a1 stiff-controlled group, Slc20a1 stable knockout cells were used. A 20 μL aliquot of the cell-GelMA suspension was injected into the exposed pancreatic body via the left abdominal access. The GelMA-cell suspension was photopolymerized within 30 s using a 405 nm light source (EFL-LS-1601–405, Yongqinquan Intelligent Equipment). The abdominal wall was closed in layers with 5–0 silk sutures.

scRNA-seq analysis

PDAC specimens harvested from murine cohorts underwent single-cell transcriptome profiling. Tissue dissociation into single-cell suspensions was performed per standardized enzymatic protocols, with subsequent single-cell capture conducted on the 10 × Genomics Chromium v3.0 platform. Library construction and sequencing were executed on Illumina HiSeq 2500 instruments (Ruixing Biotechnology, Wuhan, China) under strict 10 × Genomics specifications. Raw sequencing data were preprocessed using Cell Ranger 6.0.0, followed by “LogNormalize” normalization and analysis via Seurat 4.3.0. Cross-sample integration was achieved with the Harmony package, while cell population identification leveraged established markers from the CellMarker database and published biomarker systems.

Bulk RNA-seq analysis

Total RNA was isolated from BxPC3 cell groups using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen). RNA sequencing was commercially performed by Wuhan Zhenyue Biotechnology Co., Ltd. on the MGISEQ-2000 platform with alignment to the GRCh38 reference genome. Following data quality control, analytical procedures included: (1) identification of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) through the DeSeq package, and (2) functional annotation via gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis using the clusterProfiler package.

Acquisition of PDAC samples and strain ratio data

This study included 21 pairs of PDAC tissues and matched adjacent non-tumorous tissues, along with their Corresponding clinical data. Additionally, we retrospectively collected data from 14 PDAC patients for whom strain ratio (SR) measurements were available. The SR index is a diagnostic metric which integrates endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) with strain measurement techniques and is primarily used to assess the biomechanical properties of tissues or organs.

Statistical analysis

Quantitative data were expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD). Statistical analyses including one-way ANOVA (for single-factor group comparisons), two-way ANOVA (for multivariable experimental designs), and Student’s t-tests (for paired or unpaired samples) were performed using GraphPad Prism 8.0.2 software. The threshold for statistical significance was defined as two-tailed P-value < 0.05, with homogeneity of variance confirmed by Levene’s test prior to parametric analyses.

Results

Integrated mechano-genomic profiling identifies prognostic mediators of matrix stiffness in PDAC

‌Accumulating evidence establishes that elevated collagen expression correlates with increased stromal stiffness within the tumor microenvironment (TME). Multiple public datasets (TCGA-PAAD and GSE62452 cohorts) reveal that PDAC patients with high expression of COL1A1—a key indicator of stromal stiffness—exhibited reduced overall survival (OS) (Fig. 1A). Consistently, clinical evaluation of the Wuhan Union Hospital cohort indicated that patients exhibiting higher strain ratio (SR) presented with more advanced T-stage (Fig. 1B). In alignment with these clinical observations, in the KPC orthotopic PDAC models, TME collagen content showed progressive accumulation during disease development (Fig. 1C). Corroborating the prognostic significance of stiffness, mice bearing tumors with stiffer stroma in this model exhibited significantly shorter survival times (Fig. 1D). Collectively, these findings establish stromal stiffness as a major risk factor contributing to poor prognosis in PDAC.

Given the established correlation between collagen density and stromal stiffness in the TME, notably, the precise molecular mediators linking stromal stiffness to PDAC aggressiveness remain elusive. To address this, RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) of BxPC3 cells cultured under varied stiffness conditions identified 391 differentially expressed mechano-responsive genes (p value < 0.05) (Fig. 1E). Subsequent integrative multicohort prognostic analysis (ICGC-AU, GSE78229, GSE28735, TCGA-PAAD and E-MATB-6134) delineated 17 key regulatory mechanoresponsive factors (Fig. 1F).

Development and validation of a matrix stiffness-associated gene signature (MSAGS)

Next, we subjected the 17 key regulatory mechano responsive factors, identified above, to the integrated machine learning algorithms. As illustrated in Fig. 2A a genomic signature constructed by random survival forest (RSF) demonstrated optimal prognostic performance among 95 machine learning models for PDAC patients, achieving a mean concordance index (C-index) of 0.766 across five independent validation cohorts (GSE62452, ICGC-AU, E-MTAB-6134, GSE78229, and GSE28735 cohorts). Based on this performance, the RSF-derived multigene signature (MSAGS) was selected for further validation. Its prognostic capacity was systematically evaluated using multidimensional analytical frameworks in PDAC (Fig. 2B–C).

Multicohort temporal ROC analysis revealed that MSAGS maintained robust performance in predicting 1-, 2-, and 3-year overall survival (OS) in PDAC patients, with AUC values exceeding 0.65 across all cohorts (GSE62452, GSE78229, ICGC-AU, E-MTAB-6134, GSE79668, and GSE28735 cohorts) (Fig. 2C–M). Notably, in the GSE78229 cohort, MSAGS achieved superior AUC values of 0.817 (1 year), 0.839 (2 years), and 0.870 (3 years) (Fig. 2D–M). Comparative analysis showed that MSAGS significantly outperformed conventional clinical parameters including TNM-stage, histological grade, and resection margin status (Fig. 2D, F, H, J, and L).

Stratified survival analysis across multiple datasets revealed a significant reduction in both overall survival (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS) among high-risk PDAC patients compared to their low-risk counterparts (Supplementary Fig. S7A–I). Furthermore, multivariable Cox regression analysis, after adjustment for age, tumor grade, and TNM stage, established MSAGS as an independent prognostic factor (P < 0.01) (Supplementary Fig. S7J–S). Taken together, these results confirm that MSAGS serves as a robust and clinically actionable biomarker for stratifying PDAC risk.

MSAGS Outperforms existing models in predicting PDAC prognosis

To evaluate whether the MSAGS outperforms existing models in predicting overall survival (OS) in PDAC, we compared it with 87 previously published gene signatures. As shown in Fig. 3A–E, the MSAGS achieved higher c-index values than all other signatures in the GSE62452, GSE78229, and GSE28735 cohorts. In the E-MTAB-6134 cohort, the c-index values of MSAGS ranked fourth, while in the PACA-AU cohort, it ranked sixth. Overall, these results demonstrate the superior predictive performance of the MSAGS for OS in PDAC patients compared to previously published signatures, highlighting its clinical utility. Furthermore, these comparative findings substantiate the significant role of mechano-responsive molecules in PDAC progression.

Biomechanical matrix stiffness drives SLC20A1-dependent oncogenesis in PDAC

The expression trends of the nine genes comprising the MSGAS were validated under different mechanical stiffness conditions in BxPC3 and PANC-1 cell lines. This validation, consistent with RNA-seq results from BxPC3 cells, confirms that these genes are stiffness-regulated and that their expression trends in the stiffness microenvironment are independent of KRAS mutation status (Supplementary Fig. S1A–B and Fig. 4A). More importantly, among the nine genes constituting the MSAGS, SLC20A1 was identified by the RSF algorithm as the most significant contributor to PDAC prognosis (Fig. 2B). Based on this finding, we focused subsequent investigations on elucidating the molecular mechanisms by which SLC20A1 drives poor prognosis in PDAC.

We found that elevated matrix stiffness upregulates SLC20A1 expression in both PDAC cells and patient-derived organoids (Fig. 4A–C). Consistent with this, analysis of the CPTAC database showed that high-SLC20A1 protein expression (cut-off value of 0.221) indicated shorter OS in PDAC patients (p = 0.015) (Fig. 4D). In line with these observations, analysis of the Union Hospital cohort confirmed that SLC20A1 expression was significantly higher in PDAC tumor tissues than in matched adjacent non-tumorous tissues (P < 0.0001) and was correlated with advanced TNM stage (Fig. 4E–F).

Functionally, in vitro experiments indicated that knockdown of Slc20a1 in KPC cell lines did not significantly affect proliferation compared to the control group (Supplementary Fig. S2). However, in orthotopic KPC-derived tumors, Slc20a1 knockdown significantly reduced tumor burden (P < 0.0001) and extended median survival (p = 0.0078). These findings collectively demonstrate that the mechano-responsive molecule SLC20A1 promotes PDAC progression, likely through mechanisms independent of enhancing cancer cell proliferation.

Additionally, Masson staining revealed that SLC20A1 knockdown did not reduce collagen density in orthotopic PDAC compared with the control group (Supplementary Fig. S3), suggesting that its tumor-promoting effect is independent of collagen deposition.

SLC20A1 Drives immune evasion in PDAC via TGFB1/PD-L1 upregulation

Functional annotation via GO/KEGG analyses of TCGA-PAAD data linked SLC20A1 to immunosuppressive pathways (e.g., negative regulation of immune system process) and regulation of protein autophosphorylation in PDAC (Fig. 5A). Cross-dataset validation (TCGA-PAAD and GSE78229) confirmed that tumors with high-SLC20A1 expression exhibited significantly lower CD8 + T-cell infiltration (P < 0.05) (Fig. 5C). Among eight common immune-inhibitory molecules analyzed, SLC20A1 expression showed the strongest negative correlation with TGFB1 and PD-L1 (supplementary Fig. S4). This strong association led us to hypothesize that SLC20A1 might suppress T-cell-mediated immunity primarily by upregulating these two key factors. To further investigate how SLC20A1 mediates T-cell inhibition, we analyzed the expression trends of common immune checkpoints and molecules negatively regulating T-cell migration in the SLC20A1-low and SLC20A1-high expression groups in TCGA-PAAD cohort. Our results indicate that compared to the SLC20A1-low group, expression levels of CD274 (P < 0.01) and TGFB1 (P < 0.001) were significantly increased in the SLC20A1-high group (Figs. 5B and S1).

In vitro experiments confirmed that knocking down SLC20A1 markedly downregulated the expression of both TGFB1 and PD-L1 (Fig. 5D–F). This finding was corroborated by in vivo studies, which demonstrated a concurrent reduction of TGFB1 and PD-L1 in tumor cells from SLC20A1-knockdown orthotopic PDAC models (Fig. 5G). Notably, in orthotopic PDAC models, SLC20A1 ablation increased the infiltration of intratumoral CD8 + T cells (P < 0.01) and cytotoxic IFN-γ + CD8 + subsets (P < 0.001) (Fig. 5H).

Collectively, these findings establish that SLC20A1 drives PDAC immune escape by upregulating TGFB1 and PD-L1.

SLC20A1 functions as a mechano-immunological checkpoint in PDAC

Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) analysis of matrix stiffness-related transcriptional profiles from orthotopic PDAC models revealed that matrix stiffness was associated with significant upregulation of TGFB1 and PD-L1 (encoded by CD274) in malignant epithelial cells (Fig. 6A). This stiffness-dependent induction of TGFB1 and PD-L1 was consistently observed human PDAC organoid cultures and cell line models (Fig. 6B–C).

To determine if SLC20A1 mediates this mechano-regulation, we performed functional experiments. First, in vitro knockdown of SLC20A1 under high-stiffness conditions markedly reduced the expression of both TGFB1 and PD-L1 (Fig. 6C). Second, in orthotopic PDAC models with elevated stromal stiffness, SLC20A1 knockdown led to a significant reduction in tumor burden (P < 0.01), prolonged survival (P < 0.05), and concurrent downregulation of TGFB1 and PD-L1 in tumor cells (Fig. 6D–G).

In summary, these results establish SLC20A1 as a critical mechano-immunological checkpoint that drives the formation of an immunosuppressive microenvironment in PDAC.

Matrix stiffness engages an SLC20A1-STAT3 feedforward cascade driving TGF-β1/PD-L1–mediated immune evasion in PDAC

To elucidate the mechanism by which SLC20A1 transcriptionally regulates TGFB1 and PD-L1, we performed an integrative analysis of the hTFtarget database and TCGA-PAAD dataset, which identified nine candidate transcription factors (RUNX3, CBFB, REST, STAT1, ETS1, TCF12, TAF3, STAT3, and POLR2A) potentially co-regulating TGFB1 and CD274 (PD-L1) in PDAC (Fig. 7A). Among these, STAT3 was prioritized for further investigation because PDAC patients with high-STAT3 expression exhibited significantly elevated mRNA levels of both TGFB1 (P < 0.0001) and PD-L1 (P < 0.0001) compared to the STAT3-low subgroup (Fig. 7B). Pharmacological inhibition of STAT3 using a selective inhibitor (STAT3-IN-3, 2 μM, 48 h) in PANC-1 and BxPC3 cell lines significantly reduced mRNA expression and protein expression of both TGFB1 and PD-L1 (P < 0.01) (Fig. 7C–D).

Given that SLC20A1, as a phosphate transporter, can influence intracellular protein phosphorylation, we hypothesized that it might govern TGFB1/PD-L1 upregulation via STAT3 signaling. Mechanistic studies revealed that SLC20A1 knockdown markedly enhanced STAT3 nuclear export and reduced levels of phosphorylated STAT3 (Tyr705) levels both in vitro and in vivo (Fig. 7E–F). Furthermore, we found that matrix stiffness significantly upregulated phosphorylated STAT3 (p-STAT3) in PDAC cells, and this induction was attenuated by SLC20A1 knockdown (Fig. 7G–I). A consistent suppression of observed stiffness-induced STAT3 phosphorylation was also observed in orthotopic PDAC models (Fig. 7J). Collectively, these data establish SLC20A1 as a mechano-immunological checkpoint that amplifies STAT3-TGFB1/PD-L1 signaling to foster immune evasion in PDAC.

We next investigated whether a feedback mechanism exists, whereby STAT3 regulates SLC20A1 expression. Transcription factor enrichment analysis via the hTFtarget database identified STAT3 binding motifs within the SLC20A1 promoter. Analysis of TCGA-PAAD data showed that SLC20A1 mRNA levels were significantly higher in high-STAT3 subgroups than low-STAT3 counterparts (P < 0.0001; Fig. 7K). Moreover, STAT3 inhibition with STAT3-IN-3 in PANC-1 and BxPC3 cell lines substantially reduced SLC20A1 expression at both mRNA and protein levels (Fig. 7L–M). Critically, STAT3-IN-3 treatment also attenuated the upregulation of SLC20A1 induced by high matrix stiffness in vitro (Fig. 7N).

More importantly, to explore if the mechano-sensitive transcription factor YAP is involved, we analyzed our team’s prior RNA-seq data and found that YAP1 knockdown in PANC-1 cells did not significantly alter SLC20A1 mRNA expression (supplementary Fig. S5), suggesting that matrix stiffness upregulates SLC20A1 through a YAP-independent mechanism. In summary, these data establish a positive feedback loop wherein matrix stiffness promotes SLC20A1 expression via STAT3, and SLC20A1 in turn amplifies STAT3 activation. This SLC20A1-STAT3 axis drives TGFB1/PD-L1 signaling to foster immune evasion in PDAC.

SLC20A1-Targeting synergizes with dual TGFB1/PD-L1 blockade to amplify anti-tumor immunity in PDAC

TGFB1 and PD-L1 are critical effectors of tumor immune evasion, and their dual inhibition has been shown to enhance response to immunotherapy. Single-cell sequencing of orthotopic PDAC mouse models revealed that treatment with Y101D, a dual TGFB1/PD-L1 inhibitor, promoted the remodeling of the TME toward an immune-activated state, characterized by increased T-cell infiltration and a concomitant reduction in tumor cells compared to the control group (Fig. 8A–B and supplementary Fig. S6A). Analysis of T-cell subsets further indicated a significant expanded infiltration of CD8+ T cells in Y101D-treated tumors, alongside a reduction in both exhausted and naïve T-cell populations (Fig. 8C–D and supplementary Fig. S6B).

In therapeutic experiments using orthotopic PDAC models, monotherapy with Y101D led to a significant reduction in tumor burden (p = 0.017). (p = 0.017). However, the combination of SLC20A1 knockdown with Y101D resulted in superior tumor suppression (P < 0.001) and a prolongation of median survival (27.5 days vs. 24.5 days for monotherapy, p = 0.019) (Fig. 8E–G). Multiplex immunofluorescence analysis confirmed that this combination therapy significantly enhanced the infiltration of cytotoxic CD8 + T cells (P < 0.001) and CD8 + IFN-γ + T cells (P < 0.0001) within the TME (Fig. 8H). Furthermore, the significant rise in interferon-gamma (IFNG) upon SLC20A1 knockdown and Y101D treatment, coupled with its diverse cellular origins, points to an immune response that extends beyond CD8 + T-cell activation. This suggests the therapeutic strategy engages a broader repertoire of immune cells, including IFN-γ-producing effectors like NK and CD4 + T-cells, thereby highlighting its potential to stimulate robust anti-tumor immunity within TME.

These results demonstrate that while Y101D monotherapy can activate the PDAC TME, the anti-tumor immune response is substantially amplified when combined with SLC20A1 knockdown. Our findings therefore establish targeting SLC20A1 as a promising synergistic strategy to overcome resistance to Y101D monotherapy and potentiate anti-tumor immunity in PDAC.

Discussion

This study presents three key advances in the mechano-biology and immune regulation of PDAC. First, we developed a MSAGS incorporating a machine learning algorithm, which demonstrated superior prognostic predictive performance. Second, we identified SLC20A1 as a novel mechano-immunological checkpoint and elucidated its role in driving stiffness-dependent immune evasion via a SLC20A1-STAT3 feedforward signaling axis that enhances TGF-β1 and PD-L1 expression. Finally, preclinical studies confirmed that targeting SLC20A1 acts synergistically with BiTP to overcome therapeutic resistance. Collectively, these findings provide a novel biomechanical framework for understanding and intervening in the immunosuppressive microenvironment of PDAC.

Although numerous prognostic models for PDAC have been developed, their predictive accuracy remains insufficient for clinical application. Notably, while matrix stiffness is a key mechanical driver of PDAC progression, its independent prognostic value has not been systematically evaluated. To address this, we constructed the MSAGS signature, aiming to translate mechano-biological features into a practical prognostic tool. By integrating multiomics data with machine learning, MSAGS successfully linked the physical property of matrix stiffness to patient outcomes, demonstrating promising predictive capability. This work not only expands the dimensions of prognostic model construction but also lays the groundwork for further exploration of the role of mechanics-associated molecules in PDAC progression.

At the mechanistic level, matrix stiffness is widely recognized as a critical microenvironmental factor promoting tumor progression and immune evasion. Previous studies have shown that stiffness can induce macrophage polarization toward an M2 phenotype via activation of the CaMKK2 pathway (Guan et al.), or promote PD-L1 membrane localization via IGF2BP2-mediated sphingomyelin synthesis, thereby suppressing T-cell function. However, how stiffness systematically remodels the immunosuppressive PDAC microenvironment remains unclear. From the perspective of mechano-transduction, our study reveals the central role of the SLC20A1-STAT3 axis in stiffness-induced T-cell dysfunction and immune exclusion, providing a new perspective for systematically understanding the mechano-immunological crosstalk in PDAC.

Furthermore, this study establishes the critical role of SLC20A1, a core component of MSAGS, in PDAC immune regulation. Beyond its canonical function in phosphate transport, SLC20A1 is overexpressed in various cancers and is associated with poor prognosis, yet its mechanism in regulating the immune microenvironment was previously unreported. Through systematic in vitro and in vivo experiments, we delineated the complete pathway by which matrix stiffness upregulates SLC20A1 to promote immunosuppression. It is worth noting that while PYK2 has been reported as a mechano-immunological checkpoint regulating macrophage differentiation, our findings demonstrate that SLC20A1 plays a distinct role in regulating T-cell function and infiltration, thereby enriching the composition and understanding of the mechano-immunological network in PDAC.

From a therapeutic perspective, although bispecific inhibitors like BiTP show promise in some cancer types, their efficacy in PDAC remains limited. The physical barrier posed by matrix stiffness is likely a major factor impeding drug delivery and limiting treatment response. Therefore, developing combination strategies capable of reversing stiffness-associated immunosuppression is of significant clinical importance. Our preclinical data show that combining Slc20a1 knockdown with Y101D treatment significantly reduces tumor burden and prolongs survival, outperforming either monotherapy. This result not only provides a new strategy for overcoming immune therapy resistance in PDAC but also offers experimental rationale for the clinical application strategy of Y101D.

Despite these findings, several important questions remain unresolved. Although SLC20A1 has been identified as a stiffness-induced prognostic marker in pancreatic cancer cells, the upstream mechano-sensing mechanisms governing its upregulation—which may involve non-canonical pathways beyond YAP1—require further investigation. Furthermore, while this study demonstrates that stromal stiffness promotes immune evasion through the SLC20A1-STAT3-TGFB1/CD274 axis in cancer cells, it remains unclear whether SLC20A1 also mediates mechano-driven crosstalk between tumor cells and stromal or immune cells. Additionally, although Y101D increases cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) infiltration in TME of orthotopic PDAC mouse models, it concurrently elevates Treg populations, which may potentially constrain its therapeutic efficacy; the underlying molecular mechanisms thus warrant further exploration. Finally, the clinical translation of these findings will be contingent upon the development of targeted SLC20A1 inhibition strategies, such as ultrasound-responsive nanocarriers for siRNA delivery, to adequately evaluate the therapeutic potential of this mechano-immunological axis in PDAC.

In summary, this study integrates mechano-biological and immunological paradigms to define how matrix stiffness drives immune evasion in PDAC. The MSAGS establishes a precision prognostic framework superior to existing signatures. Our identification of SLC20A1 as a mechano-immunological checkpoint and its downstream STAT3-TGF-β1/PD-L1 feedforward axis provides a new mechanistic foundation for understanding PDAC immunosuppression. Critically, combining SLC20A1 targeting with BiTP demonstrates potent synergistic efficacy against therapeutic resistance. This work repositions matrix stiffness as a druggable target, offering a clinically actionable path to overcome current treatment barriers in PDAC.

Abbreviations

BiTP

Anti-PD-L1/TGF-Beta bispecific antibody

MSAGS

Matrix stiffness-associated gene signature

PDAC

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma

TME

Tumor microenvironment

Publisher's Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Chuanbing Zhao, Yu Lu and Long He have contributed equally to this work and share first authorship.

author contributions

Chuanbing Zhao, Yu Lu and Long He: performed the experiments; Long He: collected the clinical samples; Chuanbing Zhao: verified the experimental results; Yunpeng Zhang: performed statistical analyses; Chuanbing Zhao and Yu Lu: drafted the manuscript; Tao Yin: participated in the conception, design of the study, directed and edited the manuscript. All authors reviewed the manuscript.

Funding

This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NO: 82472989; 82173196) and Hubei Provincial Key Research and Development Project (NO: 2022BCA012).

Conflict of interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

Ethical approval

This study was approved by the Clinical Research Ethics Committee of Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology. All animal experiments were performed at the Animal Centre of Huazhong University of Science and Technology and were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of Huazhong University of Science and Technology.

Consent for publication

All authors consented to the publication of this manuscript.
