---
pmid: '41257369'
doi: 10.1080/14796694.2025.2589996
pmcid: PMC12928663
title: 'Trastuzumab deruxtecan in the treatment of HER2-positive gastric cancer: a
  comprehensive review.'
authors:
- Jubashi Amane
- Nakayama Izuma
- Shitara Kohei
journal: Future oncology (London, England)
year: 2025
month: 12
volume: '21'
issue: '30'
pages: 4043-4056
is_oa: true
oa_status: green
oa_url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12928663/
cited_by_count: 0
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Stomach Neoplasms
- Erb-b2 Receptor Tyrosine Kinases
- Trastuzumab
- Immunoconjugates
- Camptothecin
- Treatment Outcome
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols
- Drug Resistance, Neoplasm
- Antineoplastic Agents, Immunological
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- antibody-drug-conjugate
cancer_types:
- gastric
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- HER2
- epidermal growth factor receptor 2
drugs:
- T-DXd
- Trastuzumab deruxtecan
- trastuzumab
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: HER2/EGFR in Cancer Research
diseases_annotated:
- GC
- GEJC
- gastric cancer
- gastroesophageal junction cancer
- interstitial lung disease
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 0
icite_rcr: null
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
biology_processes: []
resistant_states: []
pathway_targets: []
tissue_categories:
- epithelial
---

# Trastuzumab deruxtecan in the treatment of HER2-positive gastric cancer: a comprehensive review.

## Abstract

Trastuzumab deruxtecan (T-DXd), a human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-targeted antibody - drug conjugate with a potent topoisomerase I inhibitor payload, has addressed considerable unmet needs in advanced HER2-positive gastric cancer or gastroesophageal junction cancer (GC/GEJC), particularly among patients showing disease progression following trastuzumab-based therapy. The present review summarizes the clinical development, real-world management, and future directions of T-DXd. The superiority of T-DXd was first demonstrated in the DESTINY-Gastric01 trial and subsequently confirmed in the recent global phase III DESTINY-Gastric04 trial, where it showed remarkable efficacy over chemotherapy, establishing it as the second-line standard of care. However, this efficacy must be balanced against its distinct safety profile, with interstitial lung disease representing most critical adverse event requiring vigilant monitoring and proactive management. Resistance mechanisms, including decreased HER2 expression and impaired internalization, remained the important challenges to overcome. Ongoing studies are exploring the role of T-DXd in first-line treatments, HER2-low tumors, and perioperative settings, with the aim of further expanding its therapeutic applications. These efforts hold promise for broadening the clinical utility of T-DXd and redefining the treatment algorithms for a wider population of GC/GEJC patients.

## Full Text

Trastuzumab deruxtecan in the treatment of HER2-positive gastric cancer: a comprehensive review

ABSTRACT

Trastuzumab deruxtecan (T-DXd), a human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-targeted antibody – drug conjugate with a potent topoisomerase I inhibitor payload, has addressed considerable unmet needs in advanced HER2-positive gastric cancer or gastroesophageal junction cancer (GC/GEJC), particularly among patients showing disease progression following trastuzumab-based therapy. The present review summarizes the clinical development, real-world management, and future directions of T-DXd. The superiority of T-DXd was first demonstrated in the DESTINY-Gastric01 trial and subsequently confirmed in the recent global phase III DESTINY-Gastric04 trial, where it showed remarkable efficacy over chemotherapy, establishing it as the second-line standard of care. However, this efficacy must be balanced against its distinct safety profile, with interstitial lung disease representing most critical adverse event requiring vigilant monitoring and proactive management. Resistance mechanisms, including decreased HER2 expression and impaired internalization, remained the important challenges to overcome. Ongoing studies are exploring the role of T-DXd in first-line treatments, HER2-low tumors, and perioperative settings, with the aim of further expanding its therapeutic applications. These efforts hold promise for broadening the clinical utility of T-DXd and redefining the treatment algorithms for a wider population of GC/GEJC patients.

Introduction

Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) overexpression or amplification is present in approximately 15% of gastric cancer or gastroesophageal junction cancer (GC/GEJC) patients. Advances in molecular targeted therapy have brought considerable changes in the treatment strategies for these patients. Although the combination of trastuzumab and chemotherapy was established as the first targeted therapy for HER2-positive advanced GC/GEJC in 2010, the treatment landscape has continued to evolve.

Trastuzumab deruxtecan (T-DXd) is an antibody – drug conjugate (ADC) comprising the following three components: a humanized anti-HER2 IgG1 monoclonal antibody with the same amino acid sequence as trastuzumab; a cleavable tetrapeptide-based linker; and an exatecan derivative that serves as a topoisomerase I inhibitor payload. T-DXd has the following key characteristics: 1) a novel payload: topoisomerase I inhibitor; 2) highly potent payload; 3) high drug-to-antibody ratio (DAR); 4) payload with a short plasma half-life; 5) stable linker-payload bond; 6) tumor-selective cleavable linker; and 7) bystander antitumor effect.

Following the accelerated approval of T-DXd by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA) in 2019 as a treatment for patients with HER2-positive breast cancer, T-DXd initially demonstrated safety and efficacy in HER2-positive GC/GEJC patients in the third-line or later setting in the Asian randomized phase II DESTINY-Gastric01 trial. Subsequently, the DESTINY-Gastric02 study reported the efficacy of T-DXd as a second-line treatment for patients maintaining HER2-positivity after trastuzumab-containing therapy in Western countries, leading to its conditional approval in Europe. Most recently, the first global phase III trial, DESTINY-Gastric04, demonstrated a considerable survival benefit of T-DXd over ramucirumab (RAM) plus paclitaxel (PTX) as a second-line treatment for patients with sustained HER2-positivity, thereby establishing T-DXd as a new standard of care. Furthermore, T-DXd is currently being investigated as a first-line treatment in the following two global phase III trials: the DESTINY-Gastric05 trial that investigates T-DXd with pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy; and the ARTEMIDE-Gastric01 trial that investigates T-DXd with rilvegostomig plus chemotherapy. Both trials utilize trastuzumab, pembrolizumab, and chemotherapy as the control arm. T-DXd has become a central focus in the development of novel therapies for HER2-positive GC/GEJCs. Understanding its role in the treatment landscape is essential for all clinicians managing GC/GEJC patients.

The key future challenges lie in refining and expanding the clinical use of T-DXd. These include defining its therapeutic position (first-line vs. later-line), advancing from monotherapy to combination regimens, extending its application to perioperative settings and HER2-low cases, and optimizing safety, particularly with regard to the ILD risk. In parallel, with the expansion of ADC pipelines beyond HER2 in GC/GEJC, sequencing strategies in overlapping cases will be crucial, necessitating deeper investigations into the mechanisms of resistance.

The present review provides an overview of previous and ongoing clinical trials incorporating biomarker assessments, discusses the clinical implementation of T-DXd, and explores future directions in the therapeutic development for HER2-positive GC/GEJC.

Clinical trials of T-DXd in GC/GEJC

Rationale for the 6.4-mg/kg dose of T-DXd in GC/GEJC

T-DXd was initially evaluated in the phase I DS8201A-J101 study, which concluded 6.4 mg/kg as the recommended dosage for GC/GEJC patients based on its higher objective response rate (ORR) and longer progression-free survival (PFS) compared with the 5.4-mg/kg dose.

Establishing the appropriate dosage for T-DXd represents a critical challenge in optimizing the balance between its therapeutic efficacy and safety. A dose of 5.4 mg/kg was established as the standard dose for breast and lung cancers and was later adopted for its tumor-agnostic approval in previously treated HER2-positive solid tumors. Contrarily, 6.4 mg/kg is the approved dose for GC/GEJC. This difference in dosing strategy may reflect variations in disease characteristics and safety profiles across tumor types. Yoshihara et al. conducted a comprehensive pharmacokinetic analysis of T-DXd in GC/GEJC patients, revealing that these patients exhibit approximately 15% higher T-DXd clearance compared to breast cancer patients. Importantly, T-DXd exposure in GC/GEJC patients receiving a dose of 6.4 mg/kg was equivalent to the exposure observed in breast cancer patients receiving a dose of 5.4 mg/kg. These findings suggest that the higher dosing regimen (6.4 mg/kg) provides optimal therapeutic benefit for GC/GEJC patients.

Establishing T-DXd as the standard therapy for HER2-positive GC/GEJC

Following this dose determination, the phase II DESTINY-Gastric01 trial (NCT03329690) was initiated to evaluate the efficacy and safety of T-DXd in HER2-positive GC/GEJC patients. In the DESTINY-Gastric01 trial, the outcomes of the treatment with T-DXd at a dose of 6.4 mg/kg every 3 weeks were compared with those of treatment of physician’s choice (TPC) in HER2-positive GC/GEJC patients who had received at least two prior treatment regimens, including trastuzumab, in Japan and Korea. The primary endpoint, ORR, was significantly higher in the T-DXd group (51%) than in the TPC group (14%) (p < 0.001). Additionally, the median duration of response (DOR) was 12.5 months in the T-DXd group, whereas that of the TPC group was 3.9 months. Furthermore, T-DXd demonstrated a significant overall survival (OS) benefit (hazard ratio [HR] 0.60 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.42–0.86). On the basis of these findings, T-DXd was established as the new standard third-line or later treatment for previously treated HER2-positive GC/GEJCs. These pivotal findings served as the basis for regulatory approvals in Japan and United States.

The DESTINY-Gastric02 trial (NCT04014075), a single-arm phase II study, evaluated second-line treatments in Western countries, including the United States, Belgium, Spain, Italy, and the United Kingdom. HER2 loss or downregulation reportedly occurred in approximately 34.8%–68.8% of initially HER2-positive GC/GEJC cases following trastuzumab-containing therapy. Therefore, only patients whose tumors maintained HER2 positivity were eligible for enrollment in the present study. The trial met its primary endpoint, with a confirmed ORR of 41.8%, demonstrating the efficacy of T-DXd as a second-line treatment in non-Asian countries for HER2-positive GC/GEJC patients who maintained HER2 expression after a prior trastuzumab-based therapy. Subsequently, collective evidence from both the DESTINY-Gastric01 and DESTINY-Gastric02 trials formed the foundation for regulatory approval by the European Medicines Agency, which granted a conditional approval for use in second-line settings.

The DESTINY-Gastric06 trial (NCT04989816), a single-arm phase II study, validated the efficacy of T-DXd (6.4 mg/kg) with a confirmed ORR of 29%, median PFS of 6 months and median OS of 11 months in the third- or later-line treatment of HER2-positive GC/GEJCs in China, leading to conditional approval by China’s National Medical Products Administration (NMPA). Based on these results, T-DXd became available as third- and second-line treatments in Asian and Western countries, respectively. However, reimbursement for T-DXd as a second-line treatment has been implemented only in certain regions.

An international, randomized phase III study was warranted, leading to the initiation of the DESTINY-Gastric04 trial to elucidate the safety and efficacy of T-DXd monotherapy vs. RAM plus PTX. Its primary endpoint was OS, with PFS, confirmed ORR, and DOR as its secondary endpoints. Altogether, 494 patients were enrolled and randomized (1:1) to receive either T-DXd or RAM plus PTX. For the OS, T-DXd demonstrated a statistically significant and clinically meaningful improvement compared to RAM plus PTX [T-DXd vs. RAM plus PTX: median OS of 14.7 months (95% CI, 12.1–16.6) vs. 11.4 months (95% CI, 9.9–15.5); HR for death, 0.70; 95% CI, 0.55–0.90; P = 0.004] in patients receiving a second-line treatment for HER2-positive unresectable and/or metastatic GC/GEJC. The DESTINY-Gastric 04 trial established T-DXd as a worldwide standard of care for patients with HER2-positive GC/GEJC.

Toward the first-line setting

The first-line therapy represents the next frontier for the therapeutic advancement of T-DXd in HER2-positive GC/GEJC patients. The randomized phase III KEYNOTE-811 trial established a new standard of care with trastuzumab plus pembrolizumab in combination with platinum-based doublet chemotherapy for treatment-naïve patients with HER2-positive metastatic GC/GEJC and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) combined positive score (CPS) of ≥ 1. According to the interim analysis, the addition of pembrolizumab to trastuzumab and chemotherapy resulted in a confirmed ORR of 74% in this population. Given the consistent ORR of 40%–50% observed with T-DXd monotherapy across the treatment lines, combination strategies have been considered essential for its development as a first-line therapy. The DESTINY-Gastric03 trial (NCT04379596) is a non-contemporaneous, non-randomized, multicohort phase Ib/II study exploring combination strategies with T-DXd in HER2-positive GC/GEJC patients. In part 2, T-DXd monotherapy or combination therapy with fluoropyrimidine (5-fluorouracil or capecitabine) ± pembrolizumab was tested as a front-line therapy. The addition of fluoropyrimidine, with or without pembrolizumab, consistently led to higher ORRs. The treatment of T-DXd at a dose of 6.4 mg/kg in combination with full-dose fluoropyrimidine and pembrolizumab obtained a confirmed ORR of 70%, with median PFS and OS of 14 and 23 months, respectively, in patients with HER2-positivity and CPS of ≥1. However, this combination was associated with a high rate of adverse events (91%), including grade ≥3 drug-related ILD in 7% and treatment-related deaths (TRDs) in 9% of cases, suggesting that the regimen may not be feasible.

In response to these safety findings, a reduced-dose triple combination regimen of T-DXd (5.4 mg/kg), fluoropyrimidine, and pembrolizumab demonstrated more manageable safety, with grade ≥3 adverse events occurring in only 34% of patients, serious treatment-related adverse events in 3%, and no TRD or ILD. Consequently, the DESTINY-Gastric05 trial (NCT06731478) – a global, multicenter, open-label, randomized phase III study – is currently underway to compare the efficacy between T-DXd (5.4 mg/kg) in combination with a reduced-dose of fluoropyrimidine plus pembrolizumab and trastuzumab plus pembrolizumab with platinum-based chemotherapy as first-line treatment for patients with HER2-positive metastatic GC/GEJC and PD-L1 CPS of ≥ 1. In the exploratory cohort (CPS < 1), combination regimens without pembrolizumab in both arms are also compared. In parallel, the ARTEMIDE-Gastric01 trial (NCT06764875), another global phase III study, is currently evaluating a different T-DXd-based combination in the same patient population. This study investigates the efficacy of T-DXd and fluoropyrimidine combined with rilvegostomig, a novel bispecific antibody targeting both PD-1 and TIGIT. The investigational arm (rilvegostomig + T-DXd + chemotherapy) will be compared against the same control arm as that utilized in the DESTINY-Gastric05 trial (pembrolizumab + trastuzumab + chemotherapy), with the aim of determining the clinical value of dual PD-1/TIGIT inhibition in this setting. The clinical trials discussed in this section are summarized in Table 1 and Figure 1. 

Real-world management concerns

Practical dosing strategies and toxicity management

As described in the previous section, HER2-positive GC/GEJC patients receive higher T-DXd doses than those with other tumor types. Compared to clinical trials, real-word clinical settings often involve a greater number of elderly patients and individuals with poorer performance status (PS). According to the expanded access study, 35.9% of patients required a T-DXd dose reduction to 5.4 mg/kg. The post-marketing real-world study (EN-DEAVOR) enrolled 312 patients with a median age of 70.0 years (range: 27.0–89.0 years); of these, 12.2% had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group PS of ≥2, representing an older population with worse PS compared to the clinical trial participants. The study reported that 48.4% of patients experienced grade ≥3 adverse events, with the most frequent grade ≥3 adverse events being a decreased neutrophil count (19.6%), anemia (9.3%), and anorexia (9.6%). Dose adjustments due to the occurrence of adverse events were necessary in 60.9% of patients, specifically dose reduction (36.9%), dose interruption (34.0%), and treatment discontinuation (23.7%). In the majority of patients (78.2%), treatment was initiated at a standard dose of 5.4–6.4 mg/kg, but it tended to require dose reductions as the treatment progressed. Interestingly, among patients who continued treatment for three or more cycles, those requiring dose adjustments due to adverse events had significantly longer OS than those not requiring adjustments. According to previous retrospective studies, no significant differences in clinical outcomes were observed between the initial T-DXd doses of 6.4 and 5.4 mg/kg. These results, while requiring cautious interpretation due to their nature and potential for bias, suggest that treatment continuation may be a key factor for achieving better outcomes. This seems to point toward the importance of proactive toxicity management with appropriate dose adjustments, and raises the possibility that, for unfit patients (e.g., those with poor PS), an initial dose reduction could be a practical strategy.

Practical challenges in HER2 reassessment: ctDNA as a potential solution

The DESTINY-Gastric04 trial demonstrated the superior efficacy of T-DXd over RAM plus PTX in GC/GEJC patients who maintained HER2-positivity. Following this evidence, re-assessment of the HER2 status following trastuzumab-containing therapy is recommended prior to the administration of second-line treatments. T-DXd is the preferred second-line treatment for patients retaining HER2-positivity, whereas, for those with loss of HER2 expression, RAM plus PTX is considered the standard of care. However, re-biopsy is not feasible for some patients, particularly those who have undergone gastrectomy. The turnaround time of HER2 testing is also a challenging issue in HER2 IHC 2+ cases, as they require additional ISH testing. The optimal second-line therapy is less certain for patients without HER2 re-assessment at the time of disease progression. Serial ctDNA profiling offers a feasible alternative when tissue re-biopsy is impractical. In the biomarker analysis of the DESTINY-Gastric01 trial, plasma HER2 amplification emerged as a potential marker to inform treatment decisions. In this analysis, patients with detectable plasma HER2 amplification showed a higher ORR than those without such an amplification (60.6% vs. 34.2%). This trend was even more pronounced when using an exploratory cutoff value for the adjusted plasma copy number (apCN) of HER2; patients with a high HER2 apCN (≥18.2) had a significantly higher ORR than those with a low HER2 apCN ( < 18.2) (78.6% vs. 34.3%). However, it is crucial to note that a meaningful clinical response was still observed in a notable proportion of patients lacking a detectable plasma HER2 amplification or with a low apCN. Therefore, although plasma HER2 amplification is a promising predictive biomarker, its absence should not be used as a sole criterion to exclude patients from undergoing T-DXd therapy. The limited sensitivity of plasma-based detection of HER2 amplification poses a challenge for clinical use; however, whole-genome-based ultrasensitive assays may offer a potential solution.

ILD/pneumonitis: treatment-related adverse event of special interest

Incidence

ILD represents the most serious adverse event associated with T-DXd use. According to a pooled analysis of nine phase I and II monotherapy trials, the overall incidence of T-DXd-related ILD was 15.4% (177/1,150 cases), with 77.4% (137/177) being Grade 1 or 2, 1.3% (15/1,150) Grade 3 or 4, and 2.2% (25/1,150) Grade 5. Most ILD cases (87%) occurred within 12 months of treatment initiation, with a median time to onset of 5.4 months (range: < 0.1–46.8 months). By tumor type, the incidence rates were 20.6% (105/510) for breast cancer, 8.5% (25/294) for GC, 15.3% (31/203) for lung cancer, and 8.4% (9/107) for colorectal cancer.

The clinical trial data clearly demonstrated that the ILD risk associated with T-DXd use is dose-dependent, when evaluated within the same tumor type. Studies investigating optimal dosing in HER2-mutant metastatic NSCLC (DESTINY-Lung01 and DESTINY-Lung02) and HER2-positive metastatic CRC (DESTINY-CRC02) have established that a 5.4-mg/kg dose provides a favorable risk-benefit profile as compared to the 6.4-mg/kg dose. Specifically, the 5.4-mg/kg dose achieved numerically higher or comparable ORRs (54% vs. 43% in DESTINY-Lung02; 37.8% vs. 27.5% in DESTINY-CRC02) with a significantly lower incidence of adjudicated ILD (6% vs. 14% in DESTINY-Lung02; 8% vs. 13% in DESTINY-CRC02). A similar dose relationship was confirmed in HER2-positive breast cancer patients, in whom the 5.4-mg/kg dose yielded comparable efficacy (ORR 56.5%) to the 6.4-mg/kg dose (ORR 61.5%) but with a substantially lower ILD rate (12% vs. 21%).

Clinical characteristics and imaging patterns

A previous pooled analysis has identified the independent risk factors for ILD development, which included age of < 65 years (HR 1.56, 95% CI 1.02–2.38), enrollment in Japan, oxygen saturation of < 95%, moderate or severe renal impairment, presence of lung comorbidities, > 4 years from initial diagnosis, and T-DXd treatment at a dose of > 6.4 mg/kg.

A previous post-marketing all-case surveillance in Japan has evaluated the clinical characteristics and imaging findings of T-DXd-related ILD between May 2020 and February 2022. In this study involving 130 cases (101 breast cancer and 29 GC cases), the patients’ median age was 64.5 years. Notably, a high proportion of patients had received prior treatments potentially associated with lung toxicity; 62.1% of GC patients had received prior immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) and 48.5% of breast cancer patients had a history of thoracic radiotherapy. Preexisting interstitial pneumonia was also identified in 13.8% of cases. However, this previous surveillance was not designed to evaluate the risk factors, and the specific impact of these prior therapies on T-DXd-related ILD risk remains unknown. This lack of clarity suggests that patients with such treatment histories warrant careful clinical monitoring. Regarding the disease severity and imaging findings in this cohort, 76.9% had mild cases of Grade 1 or 2. Among the imaging patterns, the organizing pneumonia (OP) pattern was the most common (63.1%), followed by the hypersensitivity pneumonitis (16.9%) and diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) 14.6% patterns. Of the 11 cases (8.5%) with fatal outcomes, eight (72.7%) showed the DAD pattern. Importantly, despite the OP pattern being the most common presentation and traditionally associated with favorable outcomes, three fatal cases (27.3% of all fatal cases) occurred in patients with this pattern. This finding emphasizes that the OP pattern, although generally associated with a better prognosis than DAD, can still be life-threatening in patients with T-DXd-related ILD. Therefore, all patients with T-DXd-related ILD require careful monitoring and prompt management, regardless of their imaging pattern, as even seemingly favorable radiographic findings do not guarantee a benign clinical course.

Management

Multiple comprehensive reviews and guidelines emphasize that early detection and prompt intervention are crucial for the management of ILD. Rigorous monitoring protocols are required, including performing baseline high-resolution chest computed tomography (CT) before initiating the T-DXd treatment, educating patients to immediately report any new or worsening pulmonary symptoms (particularly cough, dyspnea, or fever), and regular imaging surveillance with chest CT every 6–12 weeks even in asymptomatic patients. Upon suspicion of ILD (Grade 1), immediate treatment interruption is required. For confirmed Grade 1 ILD cases, the initiation of corticosteroids (e.g., prednisone at a dose of ≥0.5 mg/kg or equivalent) with continuation until recovery, followed by gradual tapering, is recommended. For grade ≥2 ILD cases, prompt initiation of high-dose corticosteroids (e.g., prednisone ≥1 mg/kg or equivalent) is required, and permanent discontinuation of T-DXd is mandatory. For Grade 3/4 cases, the management involves hospitalization and empirical intravenous administration of high-dose methylprednisolone (e.g., 500–1000 mg/day for 3 days), followed by a high-dose oral corticosteroid regimen. If clinical improvement is not observed within 3–5 days, additional workup for other etiologies should be considered, along with treatment with immunosuppressants such as infliximab or mycophenolate mofetil and/or per local practice.

Key considerations for combination therapy and rechallenge

The management of ILD becomes especially crucial in the context of con combination regimens involving ICIs. Indeed, a comprehensive systematic review has already revealed that adding ICIs to ADCs in general increases the risk of developing ILD, with the incidence rates rising from 11.5% (monotherapy) to 15.0% (combination therapy). This heightened risk is specifically highlighted in the DESTINY-Gastric03 study, where the combination of T-DXd at a dose of 6.4 mg/kg with an ICI resulted in an ILD incidence of 15.5% (13/84), including three fatal events. This considerable toxicity complications the adoption of this combination therapy in first-line settings. An additional challenge is the difficulty in differentiating whether ILD is caused by T-DXd or the ICI. Although the initial management, such as the administration of corticosteroids, may be similar, determining the causative agent is crucial for guiding subsequent treatment decisions, particularly regarding whether to re-challenge with either drug. However, it is noteworthy that in a separate arm of the DESTINY-Gastric03 study, no case of ILD was reported in patients receiving a reduced T-DXd dose of 5.4 mg/kg in combination with an ICI. This suggests that the increased risk of ILD from the combination therapy is dose-dependent and that a carefully selected dosing strategy could be key to mitigating this risk. Nevertheless, when T-DXd and ICIs are used in combination, more careful monitoring for the onset of ILD is essential compared to monotherapy, even if a reduced risk is anticipated with dose adjustments.

Furthermore, as T-DXd is increasingly used in earlier treatment lines with longer treatment durations, developing strategies for rechallenge following the development of low-grade ILD becomes a critical clinical question. Regarding the rechallenge after Grade 1 ILD, it should be carefully considered only after the complete resolution of symptoms and disappearance of active radiological findings associated with active ILD (residual scarring or fibrosis following the recovery of ILD is not considered an active disease). In a retrospective pooled analysis of nine clinical trials involving breast, lung, and GC/GEJC cases, reported at the ESMO BREAST Congress 2024, 45 patients (23.3%) received T-DXd retreatment following Grade 1 ILD onset, of whom 15 (33.3%) experienced ILD recurrence. Importantly, all ILD recurrent cases were mild, with no confirmed case of grade ≥3 ILD or deaths due to recurrent ILD, and they were generally manageable using the existing treatment guidelines.

Mechanistic insights and future directions

Although the pathophysiology of ADC-induced ILD is not yet fully understood, certain mechanistic hypotheses have been proposed. A previous study on cynomolgus monkeys suggested an association with membrane-soluble cytotoxic payloads in alveolar macrophages, with observations indicating dose-dependent and dose frequency-dependent off-target uptake of T-DXd by these alveolar macrophages. More recently, a mechanistic study evaluating T-DXd-induced ILD in an immunodeficient mouse model further elucidated this process, demonstrating that alveolar macrophages residing in the perivascular niche directly internalize T-DXd from the bloodstream via Fc – FcγR interactions. These Fc – FcγR and T – DXd interactions trigger inflammation and immune activation, leading to a phenotypic change in alveolar macrophages from an immunosuppressive to an ILD-promoting state. We observed a significant relationship between the baseline tumor burden and ILD occurrence in GC/GEJC patients, with the median total diameter of all measurable lesions being significantly smaller in patients with ILD than in those without ILD. Furthermore, we previously reported that having a total tumor diameter above the lower third was an independent protective factor against ILD. This data suggest that when the tumor burden is low, T-DXd exposure may become relatively excessive, potentially increasing the uptake by alveolar macrophages via FcγR.

In the future, leveraging the relationship between tumor burden and ILD risk through dynamic monitoring may enable individualized dosing regimens, potentially minimizing pulmonary toxicity while maintaining therapeutic efficacy.

T-DXd: resistance mechanisms

Understanding the mechanisms of resistance to T-DXd is essential for developing novel treatment strategies. The common resistance mechanisms to ADCs generally involve evasion of ADC activity at several mechanistic steps, including antibody – antigen engagement, ADC internalization and processing, or payload action (Figure 2). 

Loss or downregulation of HER2 expression

A loss or decrease in target expression is considered the most fundamental mechanism of resistance to targeted therapies, and this principle also applies to T-DXd. Indeed, in an analysis involving 34 patients with HER2 expression at baseline, 11 (32.4%) experienced a complete loss of HER2 expression and another 10 (29.4%) had a decrease in HER2 score following T-DXd therapy. This loss or decrease of HER2 expression was confirmed in patients who discontinued treatment due to disease progression, whereas the HER2 score was maintained in one patient who discontinued the treatment due to toxicity. The importance of sustained HER2 expression is further demonstrated in the biomarker analysis of the DESTINY-Gastric01 trial, the difference in ORR between T-DXd and TPC was greater in patients with sustained HER2 expression confirmed after or during trastuzumab treatment (45.7%) than in those with HER2 positivity identified before the first-line treatment with trastuzumab (33.0%). This translated into a greater magnitude of OS benefit, with a HR of 0.28 in the former group compared to 0.76 in the latter. In line with this result, our previous retrospective analysis (n = 29) showed a numerically lower ORR in patients exhibiting HER2-negativity immediately before treatment wih T-DXd than in those maintaining HER2-positivity (30.8% vs. 56.3%).

Impaired internalization and intracellular processing

Efficient internalization of the antigen – ADC complex via the endocytic pathway is essential for cytotoxic payload release. Notably, unlike monoclonal antibodies, impaired internalization constitutes a distinct resistance mechanism for ADCs. T-DXd has demonstrated clinical efficacy in patients with HER2-mutated/amplified lung cancer, likely owing to the enhanced receptor internalization rather than tumor dependence on the HER2-driven signaling pathways. However, the HER2 receptor exhibits limited internalization, posing a barrier to the therapeutic efficacy of ADC. Irreversible pan-HER inhibitors induce conformational changes in HER2, preventing its interaction with HSP90 and promoting polyubiquitination. Targeting the dynamics of internalization with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) against HER2 is potentially applicable for GC/GEJC. A preclinical study demonstrated enhanced antitumor activity when using T-DXd and the irreversible HER2-TKI, pyrotinib. EGFR amplification was associated with a reduced ORR to T-DXd in HER2-positive GC cases. EGFR overexpression leads to insufficient HER2 homodimerization and clustering, which are both critical for efficient internalization of the HER2–ADC complex. Consequently, impaired internalization reduces intracellular payload delivery and compromises the antitumor efficacy of T-DXd. Gupta et al. have previously highlighted the synergistic effects of combining EGFR monoclonal antibodies with T-DXd and the potential utility of HER2 dimerization status – rather than HER2 expression level alone – as a predictive biomarker for the response to HER2-directed ADCs. Dual blockade against HER2 and EGFR with bispecific ADCs is currently under investigation.

DXd is conjugated via a tetrapeptide-based cleavable linker, which is enzymatically degraded by lysosomal proteases such as cathepsins in response to tumor-specific conditions, including protease activity, redox stress, and acidic pH within the tumor cells or microenvironment. Although cleavable linkers play an essential role in facilitating intracellular payload release, resistance mechanisms specifically related to linker cleavage remain poorly understood in the context of T-DXd. Theoretically, such resistance may arise from the reduced expression or activity of lysosomal proteases involved in linker cleavage or from impaired lysosomal function.

Payload-specific resistance mechanisms

Decreased sensitivity to the payload also represents one resistance mechanism. A post-hoc analysis of the DESTINY-Gastric01 trial also identified cases with acquired mutations in the gene encoding topoisomerase I (E709G, L429R, D533G), with the D533G mutation particularly associated with resistance to camptothecin-based drugs.

Efflux-mediated resistance is a common mechanism for ADCs, particularly when the payload is a substrate of MDR1/P-gp. Although DXd is not a major substrate of P-gp, recent data suggest that high ABCC1 expression may be associated with a reduced therapeutic efficacy of T-DXd in breast cancer.

Role of the tumor microenvironment (TME)

The TME may also be associated with treatment resistance to T-DXd. For instance, a truncated form of HER2, p95HER2, reportedly drives immune evasion, enhances tumor growth, and confers therapy resistance by promoting cancer cell-intrinsic PD-L1 expression and the secretion of immunosuppressive mediators, including interleukin 6. Consistent with the role of the immune landscape, Koganemaru et al. found that T-DXd treatment responders showed a decrease in effector Tregs, whereas non-responders showed an opposite trend. This suggests that immune modulation may contribute to the durability of T-DXd treatment efficacy in GC patients. They also showed that CD8+ T cell density tended to increase during treatment, with responders particularly showing an increase in the number of PD1 + CD8 + T cells. These findings suggest that T-DXd may potentially modulate an immunosuppressive TME into an immunogenic one, supporting a theoretical rationale for combination therapies involving ICIs.

Alternative ADC agents competing with T-DXd

In parallel with T-DXd, new ADCs with different targets or payload mechanisms are also emerging, potentially expanding the treatment options for GC.

RC48 (disitamab vedotin): a monomethyl auristatin E (MMAE)-based ADC

RC48 (disitamab vedotin) is a HER2-targeted ADC developed in China, using MMAE as its payload. The fundamental difference in payload mechanisms has important clinical implications. Topoisomerase I inhibitors such as deruxtecan in T-DXd cause DNA damage during replication, leading to characteristic toxicities including ILD/pneumonitis and hematologic toxicities, particularly neutropenia and anemia. Contrarily, MMAE-based ADCs such as RC48 disrupt microtubule assembly, resulting in a distinct toxicity profile dominated by peripheral neuropathy, a hallmark of antimicrotubular agents. This mechanistic difference also influences the resistance patterns; tumors developing resistance to T-DXd through topoisomerase I-related mechanisms may remain sensitive to MMAE-based ADCs, and vice versa, potentially allowing sequential ADC therapy as long as the HER2 expression is maintained. The RC48-C008 trial (NCT03556345), a single-arm phase II study targeting HER2-positive GC patients with prior second-line treatment, reported a response rate, PFS, and OS of 24.8%, 4.1 months, and 7.9 months, respectively. Based on these results, RC48 received conditional marketing approval from China’s NMPA in 2021 for the treatment of patients with HER2-positive locally advanced or metastatic GC/GEJC who have previously received at least two systemic therapies. A randomized, multicenter, open-label phase III clinical trial (NCT04714190) is ongoing to confirm the efficacy of RC-48 compared to standard therapy in prolonging survival in HER2-positive advanced GC/GEJC patients. According to the updated results from the multicenter, single-arm, phase II RCTS trial (n = 57), which included six patients with HER2 IHC2+/FISH-negativity, first-line RC48 combined with tislelizumab and S-1 (40–60 mg twice daily for 14 days) showed a confirmed ORR of 89.4% (95% CI, 78.5%–96.0%) and median PFS of 13.1 months (95% CI, 10.8–NE). Favorable results with an ORR of 87.1% and a median PFS of 11.4 months were reported even in patients with PD-L1 CPS of < 1. The most common Grade 3 adverse events included neutropenia (29.8%), peripheral neuropathy (10.5%), and anemia (10.5%). The prominence of peripheral neuropathy as a Grade 3 adverse event markedly contrasts with the findings from the T-DXd clinical trials, where it is rarely reported as a significant toxicity. This difference in safety profiles may influence treatment selection according to the individual patient comorbidities and prior treatment-related toxicities (e.g., residual peripheral neuropathy from oxaliplatin or PTX).

Other emerging HER2-targeted ADCs in early development

ARX788, comprising an anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody linked to monomethyl auristatin F through a non-cleavable linker (DAR of ~2.0), showed efficacy in T-DM1-resistant breast cancer and GC models. In a phase I dose-expansion study involving 30 patients with HER2-positive advanced gastric cancer (AGC), ARX788 achieved an ORR of 38%, with median PFS and OS of 4.1 and 10.7 months, respectively. Based on these findings, ARX788 received FDA orphan drug designation in 2021 for HER2-positive AGC. A phase II/III trial evaluating its efficacy as a second-line therapy is currently underway (CTR20211583).

MRG002 is an ADC composed of MMAE and the anti-HER2 antibody MAB802, which shares the same sequence as trastuzumab. In a phase I trial, it showed manageable toxicity and potent antitumor activity in HER2-positive solid tumors, including GC and breast cancer.

SHR-A1811 is a novel ADC comprising trastuzumab, a cleavable linker, and the topoisomerase I inhibitor SHR169265, which has greater membrane permeability and stronger antitumor activity compared to deruxtecan. The inclusion of an achiral cyclopropyl group enhances chemical stability and limits premature toxin release, contributing to fewer early adverse effects. With a moderate DAR of 6 and minimal early toxin release, SHR-A1811 demonstrated a favorable safety profile. In a phase I study of heavily pretreated HER2-expressing or mutated solid tumors, 50% of GC/GEJC patients showed treatment response, with ILD reported in only 2.6% of cases. Ongoing trials include a phase III study of SHR-A1811 in resistant HER2-positive GC/GEJC (NCT06123494) and a multicohort phase Ib/II study combining SHR-A1811 with chemotherapy or the PD-L1/TGF-β bifunctional fusion protein SHR-1701 (NCT05671822).

Except for RC48, most agents are still in the early phase of development. Although their efficacy as monotherapy remains inferior to that of T-DXd, their lower toxicity makes them more amenable to combination therapy. Given the findings from DESTINY-Gastric03, many of these agents are considered more manageable in combination with cytotoxic chemotherapy than with T-DXd. Encouraging results have been reported in this context, suggesting their potential in future front-line development.

Future perspectives

T-DXd has emerged as a paradigm-shifting agent, demonstrating an ORR of approximately 40%–50% with durable responses across multiple treatment lines. The DESTINY-Gastric04 study is the first randomized phase III global trial that established its therapeutic role and broadened access to this agent.

Optimizing safety: the unmet need for ILD predictive biomarkers

Optimal management of adverse events, especially severe ILD, is essential to fully realize the potential of this agent. Currently, no reliable biomarker exists to predict ILD development, and the identification of such markers will be crucial for the safe and widespread adoption of T-DXd. A longitudinal serum proteomics analysis across key DESTINY trials (Breast01, −04, and -Lung01) identified CXCL11 as a predictive biomarker for severe ILD. Notably, the CXCL11 levels were elevated well before the clinical diagnosis, suggesting a potential window for early detection and preventive intervention before the symptoms or imaging changes become apparent. Although we have previously demonstrated an association between tumor burden and ILD development, future directions may include developing composite risk scoring models that incorporate existing risk factors, including tumor burden, and establishing individualized dose adjustment methods based on these models.

Advancing T-DXd: from monotherapy to combination approaches

Earlier lines of therapy represent the next frontier for T-DXd in the treatment of GC/GEJC. Although combination strategies are crucial for enhancing efficacy, findings from the DESTINY-Gastric03 trial highlight the need for dose reduction when used with cytotoxic agents. The DESTINY-Gastric05 trial directly addresses this challenge.

Identifying new combination partners to enhance the efficacy of this agent is an area of active investigation. Parts 3 and 4 of the DESTINY-Gastric03 trial are currently evaluating the combination of T-DXd and fluoropyrimidine plus volrustomig and rilvegostomig, which are bispecific antibodies targeting PD-1 and CTLA-4. Valemetostat, an oral inhibitor of enhancer of zeste homolog 2/1, has shown clinical efficacy and an acceptable safety profile in multiple hematologic malignancies. Its mechanism of action suggests the potential to sensitize cancer cells to the DNA damaging effects induced by ADCs; a phase Ib clinical trial evaluating combination regimens with T-DXd is ongoing (NCT06244485). Zongertinib (BI 1,810,631), a novel oral HER2-selective TKI that spares EGFR, demonstrated promising tolerability and efficacy in patients with HER2-positive advanced solid tumors, including metastatic GC/GEJC, in a phase I trial (NCT04886804). Moreover, the Beamion BCGC-1 trial (NCT06324357), a phase Ib/II dose-escalation/optimization study investigating the combination of zongertinib with T-DXd or T-DM1 in patients with HER2-positive metastatic GC/GEJC or metastatic breast cancer, is ongoing. Importantly, the combination of a TKI with T-DXd substantially enhances endocytosis, potentially leading to improved anti-tumor efficacy while allowing for lower drug doses and a reduced risk of adverse reactions.

Expanding the role of T-DXd into the perioperative setting and HER2-low diseases

The treatment landscape is expanding into the perioperative setting. In the multicenter phase II EPOC2003 trial conducted in Japan, which evaluated T-DXd monotherapy as a preoperative chemotherapy, the primary endpoint of major pathological response rate was limited to 14.8%, showing a restricted efficacy. Consequently, an expanded cohort with perioperative T-DXd in combination with capecitabine and durvalumab is currently underway (NCT05034887). Furthermore, the NEOART trial (NCT06731803), combining T-DXd with chemotherapy (5-FU/LV or FLO) as preoperative chemotherapy, and the innovative TRINITY trial (NCT06253650), evaluating the efficacy of T-DXd as a postoperative adjuvant therapy in high-risk patients with minimal residual disease detected by liquid biopsy (ctDNA) after surgery are in progress (Table 1).

Through its bystander killing effect, T-DXd broadens its therapeutic applicability beyond HER2-high tumors to include HER2-expressing tumors. Recent findings have revealed HER2-binding-independent extracellular payload release and potent immunostimulatory effects. T-DXd monotherapy has demonstrated efficacy in breast cancer patients with both HER2-low and ultra-low expressions. An exploratory analysis of the DESTINY-Gastric01 trial showed the efficacy of T-DXd in a HER2-low cohort. Subsequently, several trials are in progress to further investigate this (DESTINY-Gastric03-HER2-Low-Cohort, NCT05894824, jRCT2031230477) (Table 1). However, the overlap with other actionable biomarkers, including CLDN18.2 or FGFR2b, presents a challenge in selecting the appropriate patients. To address this complexity, comprehensive genomic profiling and the development of dynamic biomarkers are crucial – with highly sensitive, whole-genome-based ctDNA emerging as one of the most promising approaches.

The evolving ADC landscape and sequencing challenge

Beyond T-DXd, the entire ADC landscape for GC/GEJC is rapidly evolving. In addition to the HER2-targeting ADCs, novel ADCs targeting different antigens, including CLDN18.2, TROP2, and HER3, are currently under development. As this development results in multiple ADC options, the challenge of ADC sequencing emerges. Specifically, when using ADCs, determining whether acquired resistance mechanisms result from decreased target expression or resistance to the payload itself is crucial. If it is the former, ADCs with the same payload but different targets may be effective; if the latter, agents with different payloads must be selected. Combination therapies involving ADCs or bispecific ADCs may enable the development of novel personalized treatment strategies.

In conclusion, ADCs have emerged as a marriage of biologics and small molecules, offering potent and selective efficacy alongside a favorable toxicity profile. T-DXd is the first approved ADC targeting HER2 for the treatment of GC/GEJC, marking an important shift in the therapeutic landscape. Now that ADCs have become an essential component of the treatment for GC/GEJC, the next challenge lies in optimizing their use by maximizing their efficacy and minimizing their toxicity based on their unique properties.

Article highlights

Trastuzumab deruxtecan (T-DXd) is now established as the standard second-line treatment for human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-positive gastric or gastroesophageal junction cancer (GC/GEJC), showing considerable survival benefit over ramucirumab plus paclitaxel in the DESTINY-Gastric04 trial.

The risk of interstitial lung disease (ILD), a critical T-DXd-related toxicity, is influenced by dose dependence and specific patient risk factors. Thus, special caution is needed when T-DXd is combined with immune checkpoint inhibitors, as the ILD risk may be increased.

The therapeutic role of T-DXd is actively being expanded, with ongoing clinical trials investigating its use in first-line treatments and perioperative settings and for HER2-low GC/GEJCs.

Authors’ contributions

Amane Jubashi: Writing-original draft, Writing-review & editing.

Izuma Nakayama and Kohei Shitara: Supervision, Writing-review & editing.

Disclosure statement

I. Nakayama: Research funding from Astellas, Ono Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Merck Sharp & Dohme (MSD), Daiichi Sankyo, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. Honoraria from Astellas, Ono Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Bristol Myers Squibb, Merck Sharp & Dohme (MSD), Daiichi Sankyo, and Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.

K. Shitara: Personal fees for consulting and advisory roles from Bristol Myers Squibb, Takeda, Ono Pharmaceutical, Novartis, Daiichi Sankyo, Amgen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Merck Pharmaceutical, Astellas, Guardant Health Japan, Janssen, AstraZeneca, Zymeworks Biopharmaceuticals, ALX Oncology Inc., Bayer, GlaxoSmithKline K.K., HEALIOS K.K., Moderna.Inc, and Arcus Biosciences Inc. Honoraria from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Ono Pharmaceutical, Janssen, Eli Lilly, Astellas, and AstraZeneca. Research funding (all to institution) from Astellas, Ono Pharmaceutical, Daiichi Sankyo, Taiho Pharmaceutical, Chugai, Merck Pharmaceutical, Amgen, Eisai, PRA Health Sciences, Syneos Health, AstraZeneca, PPD-SNBL K.K. and TORAY.

The authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript apart from those disclosed.

Reviewer disclosure

Peer reviewers on this manuscript have no relevant financial or other relationships to disclose.
