---
pmid: '41311198'
doi: 10.1080/21645515.2025.2589647
pmcid: PMC12667663
title: Neutralizing antibody responses to the primary series of a COVID-19 mRNA vaccine
  in the cancer cohort under active treatment.
authors:
- Xue Huijing
- Kemp Troy J
- Li Chenglei
- Roche Nancy V
- Bakouny Ziad
- Labaki Chris
- Lee Guo-Shou Mary
- Trowbridge Rachel
- Strauss Sarah
- Hughes Melissa E
- Lin Nancy U
- Choueiri Toni K
- Pinto Ligia A
journal: Human vaccines & immunotherapeutics
year: 2025
month: 12
volume: '21'
issue: '1'
pages: '2589647'
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1080/21645515.2025.2589647
cited_by_count: 0
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Antibodies, Neutralizing
- Antibodies, Viral
- COVID-19
- Middle Aged
- Female
- Male
- COVID-19 Vaccines
- Neoplasms
- Aged
- SARS-CoV-2
- Adult
- Immunoglobulin G
- Spike Glycoprotein, Coronavirus
- Neutralization Tests
- Cohort Studies
- mRNA Vaccines
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms: []
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- spike
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 Research
diseases_annotated:
- COVID-19
- cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 0
icite_rcr: null
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
biology_processes: []
resistant_states: []
pathway_targets: []
---

# Neutralizing antibody responses to the primary series of a COVID-19 mRNA vaccine in the cancer cohort under active treatment.

## Abstract

Individuals with cancer are at increased risk of severe COVID-19 and immunogenicity of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines may be compromised, especially in those receiving systemic anti-cancer treatment. Understanding how treatment affects vaccine-induced humoral responses is critical to optimize vaccination strategies in this vulnerable population. This study evaluated neutralizing antibody responses to SARS-CoV-2 vaccination in cancer cohorts undergoing active treatment or not, measured at multiple timepoints before and after vaccination using a pseudovirus-based neutralization assay. We observed significantly lower seroconversion rates and impaired neutralizing antibody responses in the cancer cohort on active treatment compared to those not on treatment, suggesting an association between active treatment and a compromised functional immune response. Although strong correlations between anti-spike IgG and neutralizing antibodies were observed across all groups, regression analyses revealed potential differences in the relationship between binding and functional antibodies. We also observed the correlation between avidity and neutralizing antibodies varied across groups. These findings suggest that active systemic therapy impaired both the quantity and quality of antibody responses. Tailored vaccination timing and monitoring may be critical in reducing the risk of severe COVID-19 symptoms and improving COVID-19 vaccine efficacy in this population.

## Full Text

Neutralizing antibody responses to the primary series of a COVID-19 mRNA vaccine in the cancer cohort under active treatment

ABSTRACT

Individuals with cancer are at increased risk of severe COVID-19 and immunogenicity of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines may be compromised, especially in those receiving systemic anti-cancer treatment. Understanding how treatment affects vaccine-induced humoral responses is critical to optimize vaccination strategies in this vulnerable population. This study evaluated neutralizing antibody responses to SARS-CoV-2 vaccination in cancer cohorts undergoing active treatment or not, measured at multiple timepoints before and after vaccination using a pseudovirus-based neutralization assay. We observed significantly lower seroconversion rates and impaired neutralizing antibody responses in the cancer cohort on active treatment compared to those not on treatment, suggesting an association between active treatment and a compromised functional immune response. Although strong correlations between anti-spike IgG and neutralizing antibodies were observed across all groups, regression analyses revealed potential differences in the relationship between binding and functional antibodies. We also observed the correlation between avidity and neutralizing antibodies varied across groups. These findings suggest that active systemic therapy impaired both the quantity and quality of antibody responses. Tailored vaccination timing and monitoring may be critical in reducing the risk of severe COVID-19 symptoms and improving COVID-19 vaccine efficacy in this population.

Introduction

Individuals with cancer are at increased risk for severe Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) outcomes due to their disease conditions and the immunosuppressive effects of anticancer therapies. Effective vaccines against SARS-CoV-2 (the causative virus of COVID-19) are available; however, the immune response to vaccines is impaired in individuals with cancer. Additionally, the impact of active anticancer treatments on vaccine-induced immunity remains inconclusive and appears to vary depending on the treatment type and cancer subtype. Comparative studies investigating vaccine-induced immunity between cancer cohorts with and without active therapy are still lacking, but they are critical to inform vaccination recommendations for this population, in particular vaccination timing in relationship to treatment and the need for additional protective strategies.

Humoral responses to COVID-19 vaccines are often evaluated by measuring anti-spike IgG levels. However, measuring neutralizing antibodies (NAbs), which block viral entry into host cells, is critical to characterize the neutralization antibody function. Although the correlates of protection remain difficult to establish, NAbs are considered key indicators of immune protection. In this study, SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibody responses were evaluated using a pseudovirus (PsV)-based neutralization assay (PBNA) in three cohorts who received the primary COVID-19 vaccination series: individuals with cancer on active treatment, individuals with cancer not receiving treatment, and healthy individuals. Additionally, the correlations between anti-spike IgG levels and NAb titers were investigated to evaluate if anti-spike IgG levels are good surrogates for functional immunity in the cancer population. We also examined the correlation between antibody avidity and neutralizing activity across groups, given that avidity reflects antibody maturation and may impact protective capacity. These findings aim to provide insight into the differential immune responses to COVID-19 vaccination among cancer subgroups and to understand the influence of active cancer treatment in this population.

Materials and methods

Study enrollment

The VERIFY-C (SARS-CoV-2 VaccinE Response, Immunological eFfects and safetY in individuals with Cancer) study enrolled adults (≥18 years) with a confirmed cancer diagnosis to assess SARS-CoV-2 vaccine immunogenicity in those with or without recent systemic anti-cancer therapy. Eligible participants agreed to receive two doses of a COVID-19 vaccine and had a documented cancer diagnosis between January 1, 1980 to July 17, 2022. Participants were categorized by treatment status at the time of their first vaccine dose: the Active-Treatment cancer group included those receiving systemic anti-cancer therapy within 6 months prior to vaccination. The Non-Active-Treatment cancer group included those who had never received systemic therapy or completed treatment more than 6 months earlier. This 6-month cutoff was selected based on evidence that immune recovery could occur within 3–6 months after systemic therapy, and current guidelines recommend delaying vaccination for up to 6 months after immunosuppressive therapy, especially B-cell depletion or hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, to optimize vaccine efficacy. Individuals with a prior confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection (positive RT-PCR) were excluded. All participants provided informed consent prior to or at the time of vaccination. The BNT162b2 (Pfizer) vaccine was administered from March to June 2021. A healthy group without a cancer diagnosis was selected from a previously published cohort. They were matched based on vaccine manufacturer to cancer participants in the VERIFY-C cohort and received BNT162b2 (Pfizer) vaccine. Only samples collected at 1 month and 6 months post-primary series were available for the healthy group.

Sample and data collection

Under the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute (DFCI) Protocol number 21–049, blood was collected from the cancer participants and processed at four timepoints: (1) pre-first COVID vaccine dose, (2) pre-second COVID vaccine dose, (3) 1-month post-primary series, and (4) 6-month post-primary series. Frozen sera samples were shipped from DFCI to the Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNL) for further testing. Serum samples from healthy donors were drawn from Occupational Health Services (OHS), FNL, Frederick MD, under the Research Donor Protocol OH99CN046. Only serum samples from 1-month and 6-month post-primary series were available in the healthy group. Serum samples were kept at −80°C until testing. Prior to testing, the samples were aliquoted and heat-inactivated at 56°C for 30–60 minutes to minimize freeze-thaw events of the sample. Demographic and clinical data were collected through individual-reported outcome questionnaires and medical records, which were then stored in a RedCap database.

Cell culture

HEK293T/17 cells (ATCC, Cat# CRL-11268) were maintained in the 293T/17 growth medium (DMEM with GlutaMAX, Thermo Fisher, Cat# 10569044; 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum, Cytiva, Cat# SH30070.03HI; 50 mg gentamicin/mL, Millipore Sigma, Cat# G1272; 25 mM HEPES, Thermo Fisher, Cat# 15630080) in a humidified 37°C, 5% CO2 environment. HEK293T-ACE2.TMPRSS2 (mCherry) (BEI, Cat# NR-55293) were maintained in the 293T-ACE2.TMPRSS2 growth medium (DMEM with GlutaMAX, Thermo Fisher, Cat# 10569044; 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum, Cytiva, Cat# SH30070.03HI; 100 U/mL Penicillin-Streptomycin, Thermo Fisher, Cat# 15140122) in a humidified 37°C, 5% CO2 environment. Both cells were split at confluency using TrypLE Select Enzyme solution (Thermo Fisher, Cat# 12563029).

Pseudovirus (PsV) production and titration

Lentiviral pseudotyped SARS-CoV-2 viruses were produced as previously described by Shen et al. An expression plasmid encoding codon-optimized spike of the D614G strain, a lentiviral backbone plasmid (pCMVDR8.2) and a firefly Luc reporter gene plasmid (pHR’ CMV Luc) were a gift from Dr. David Charles Montefiori’s lab at Duke University. D614G PsV was produced in HEK293T/17 cells (ATCC, Cat# CRL-11268) by transfection using Fugene 6 (Promega, Cat# E2692) and a combination of spike plasmid, pCMVDR8.2 and pHR’ CMV Luc in a 1:17:17 ratio in Opti-MEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# 31985070). After 16–20 hours incubation at 37°C, medium was replaced, and pseudovirus-containing supernatant was collected 48 h later, followed by 0.45 μm filtration. After the collection, PsV were aliquoted and stored in −80°C freezer.

To titrate, PsVs were serially diluted two-fold in triplicate for a total of 8 dilutions in 96-well cell culture plates (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# 268200). Freshly suspended HEK293T-ACE2.TMPRSS2 cells were added (12500 cells/well) and incubated in a humidified 37°C, 5% CO2 incubator for 70–74 h. After the incubation, medium was removed by gentle aspiration and 30 μL of 1X lysis buffer (Promega, Cat# E1531) was added to each well. After a 10-min incubation at room temperature, 100 μL of Bright-Glo luciferase reagent (Promega, Cat# E2650) was added to each well, mixed, and 110 μL of the mixture from each well was added to a white 96-well plate (Revvity, Cat# 6055290). Luminescence was measured using a SpectraMax plate reader (Molecular Devices, San Jose, CA, USA). SoftMax Pro GxP 7.0.3 was used to determine the dilution factor in which PsV could yield target signal.

Pseudovirus-based neutralization assay (PBNA)

The PBNA assay was performed as previously described by Shen et al. Pre-titrated PsV (50 μL/well) was incubated with eight serial four-fold dilutions of serum samples (50 μL/well) in duplicate for 1 h at 37°C in 96-well cell culture plates (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# 268200). Cells were detached using TrypLE Select Enzyme solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# 12563029), suspended in 293T-ACE2.TMPRSS2 growth medium (125,000 cells/mL) and immediately added to each well (100 μL/well). After 70–74 h of incubation, medium was removed by gentle aspiration and 30 μL of 1X lysis buffer (Promega, Cat# E1531) was added to each well. After a 10-min incubation at room temperature, 100 μL of Bright-Glo luciferase reagent (Promega, Cat# E2650) was added to each well. About 110 μL of the mixture from each well was immediately transferred to a white 96-well plate (Revvity, Cat# 6055290). Luminescence was measured using a SpectraMax plate reader (Molecular Devices, San Jose, CA, USA). Neutralization titers are the inhibitory dilution (ID) of serum samples at which relative light units (RLU)s were reduced by 50% (ID50) compared to virus control wells after subtraction of background RLUs. SoftMax Pro GxP 7.0.3 was used to determine ID50 with a 5-parameter logistic model.

Statistical analysis

To assess differences in seroconversion rates between groups, Fisher’s exact test was used for pairwise comparisons, with p-values adjusted using the Bonferroni correction for multiple testing. Non-parametric Wilcoxon rank sum tests were used to compare ID50 between different groups, at each timepoint. Neutralizing antibody levels were reported as geometric mean with 95% confidence intervals (95% CI). Spearman’s rank correlation coefficients (ρ) were performed on raw antibody titers to evaluate the relationship between anti-spike IgG levels and neutralizing antibody titers. To further evaluate the quantitative relationship, linear mixed-effects models were used to evaluate the relationship between spike IgG levels and neutralizing antibody titers, which were log-transformed to better meet model assumptions. Type III analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to assess the significance of main effects and interaction terms in the model. Post-hoc comparisons of slopes between groups were conducted using estimated marginal means and their contrasts to evaluate differences in the strength of association across groups. A significance level of 0.05 was used for all statistical tests. All tests were two-tailed.

Results

Study participant characteristics

A total of 53 participants with cancer were recruited, with 20 participants with active treatment and 33 participants without active treatment (Table 1). Age, sex, race, and ethnicity were listed in Table 1. Cancer types were detailed in Supplementary Table 1. All cancer participants received two doses of the BNT162b2 vaccine, with an overall mean time of 22 days between doses. The healthy group was vaccine-matched to cancer groups. Prior to the first vaccine dose, all participants in Active-Treatment cancer group were undergoing cancer treatment within 6 months. Among those participants, the majority received combination therapy (60%), followed by chemotherapy (15%), immunotherapy (10%), targeted therapy (10%), and hormonal therapy (5%) (Supplementary Table 2). In contrast, Non-Active-Treatment cancer group included both treatment-naïve patients (21%) and those who completed therapy more than 6 months prior (79%) (Supplementary Table 1). Post-first vaccine dose, 55% in Active-Treatment cancer group continued with cancer treatment.

Seroconversion rate in different groups at different timepoints

The neutralizing antibody seroconversion rate was evaluated and compared between individuals with cancer (with and without active treatment) and healthy individuals (Table 2). Prior to receiving the first vaccine dose, none of the participants in the Non-Active-Treatment cancer group tested positive for neutralizing antibodies compared to 10.5% of the participants in the Active-Treatment cancer group. Prior to the second vaccine dose, only 18.8% of the participants in the Active-Treatment cancer group exhibited detectable neutralizing antibodies, compared to 72.7% in the Non-Active-Treatment cancer group (p < .0001). Due to sampling limitations, seroconversion rate data on the healthy group prior to vaccination were unavailable. At 1-month post-primary vaccination, 76.5% of the participants in the Active-Treatment cancer group were seropositive compared to 100% of the Non-Active-Treatment cancer group (p < .0001) and 100% of the healthy group. At 6-month post-primary vaccination, 70.6% of the participants in the Active-Treatment cancer group remained seropositive compared to 92.6% in the Non-Active-Treatment cancer group (p = .0020) and 100% in the healthy group (Active-treatment cancer group: p < .0001; Non-Active-Treatment cancer group: p = .1121).

Neutralizing antibody titers in different groups at different timepoints

Neutralizing antibody responses to primary vaccine series were also compared between the two groups (Figure 1). Even with just one dose, the participants in the Non-Active-Treatment cancer group already showed significantly higher (p < .001) neutralizing antibody titer than the Active-Treatment cancer group, with geometric mean titers of 60.4 (95% CI: 35.5–102.8) and 14.0 (95% CI: 9.8–20.1), respectively. At 1-month post-primary series, the geometric mean titer of neutralizing antibody in the Non-Active-Treatment cancer group was 493.2 (95% CI: 372.4–653.2), which was significantly higher (p < .001) than the response in the Active-Treatment cancer group (94.8, 95% CI: 44.3–202.7). The healthy group exhibited a significant higher neutralizing antibody titer (978.7, 95% CI: 745.4–1285.1) than both Active-Treatment cancer group (94.8, 95% CI: 44.3–202.7, p < .001) and Non-Active-Treatment cancer group (493.2, 104.6, 95% CI: 372.4–653.2, p = .0052) at 1-month post-primary series. However, no differences were observed among these groups at 6-month post-primary series. 

The impact of cancer type on the neutralizing antibody responses was also evaluated. In individuals with solid cancer, individuals without treatment exhibited significantly higher neutralizing antibody levels than those that received treatment at pre-second dose (66.0, 95% CI: 36.2–120.1 versus 13.0, 95% CI: 9.2–18.4) and 1-month post-primary series (471.5, 95% CI: 346.0–642.5 versus 94.2, 95% CI: 43.0–206.0) (Supplementary Figure 1). No significant differences were observed at other timepoints for individuals with solid cancer. Additionally, no significant differences were observed at any timepoints for individuals with hematological cancer, potentially due to the small sample size.

To explore potential differences by treatment type, we compared neutralizing antibody responses between Active-Treatment and Non-Active-Treatment participants within each type, including combination therapy, chemotherapy, and immunotherapy subgroups, as only these categories included participants from both groups (Supplementary Figure 2). While subgroup sample sizes were quite limited, trends were consistent with the overall Active- vs. Non-Active-Treatment comparisons, with participants receiving combination therapy or chemotherapy showing lower neutralizing antibody responses at pre-second dose and 1-month post-primary series.

Correlation and regression analysis between neutralizing antibody level and anti-spike IgG

We evaluated the correlation and linear regression between anti-spike IgG levels reported in a prior study using the same cohort and neutralizing antibody titers across different groups and timepoints. When data from all timepoints were pooled, strong correlations between neutralizing antibody titer and anti-spike IgG level can be observed in the Active-Treatment cancer group (ρ = 0.857), the Non-Active-Treatment cancer group (ρ = 0.946) and the healthy group (ρ = 0.945) (Figure 2A,C). 

Slope estimates were obtained from linear mixed-effects models using log-transformed antibody measurements, allowing interpretation of proportional relationships between anti-spike IgG and neutralizing antibody titers. The healthy control group demonstrated the steepest slope (1.059), followed by the Non-Active-Treatment cancer group (0.843), while the Active-Treatment cancer group showed the flattest slope (0.790) (Figure 2B,C). The overall test for slope differences among the three groups was marginally non-significant (p = .073; Figure 2D). Although not statistically significant, pairwise comparisons indicated a trend toward a difference in slope between healthy controls and the Active-Treatment cancer group approached statistical significance (p = .060), whereas all other comparisons were not significant (p > .1).

Beside anti-spike IgG levels, we also assessed the correlation between avidity and neutralizing antibody titers (Supplementary Figure 2). In the healthy group, a significant negative correlation was observed (ρ = −.443, p = .019), suggesting that higher neutralizing titers were associated with lower avidity. In the Active-Treatment cancer group, there was a moderate positive correlation between neutralizing antibody titers and avidity with marginal significance (ρ = 0.324, p = .050). In the Non-Active-Treatment cancer group, the correlation was weak and not statistically significant (ρ = 0.145, p = .186).

Discussion

People with cancer have demonstrated impaired immune responses to vaccination due to the underlying malignancy and the immunosuppressive nature of various systemic anti-cancer therapies. However, there is still a remaining gap in understanding of how anti-cancer treatment affects humoral immune responses in the cancer cohort following vaccination. Characterizing the immune response to SARS-CoV-2 vaccination in these populations is essential for informing and then implementing the best vaccine strategies in this vulnerable population. In this study, neutralizing antibody responses to the COVID-19 vaccine primary series were evaluated in three cohorts 1) individuals with cancer and receiving active treatment (Active-Treatment cancer group); 2) individuals with cancer and not receiving active treatment (Non-Active-Treatment cancer group); and 3) individuals that do not have cancer (healthy control group), using a qualified neutralization assay for the D614G strain of SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein. Neutralizing antibodies are considered a predictor of immune protection.

Seroconversion rates of neutralizing antibodies were compared across the different groups. At pre-second dose, 1-month and 6-month post-primary series, untreated cancer cohort consistently exhibited significantly higher seroconversion rates than individuals under active treatment, potentially indicating active anti-cancer treatment can impair the neutralizing antibody responses in the cancer cohort. Furthermore, the healthy group showed a significantly higher seroconversion rate than the Non-Active-Treatment cancer group at 6-month post-primary series, consistent with other studies demonstrating that healthy individuals display more durable responses compared to individuals with cancer regardless of treatment status. Additionally, prior to the first dose, 10.5% of the participants in the Active-Treatment cancer group showed positive neutralizing antibody titer. Our previous study of the same VERIFY-C cohort showed that all participants were screened for nucleocapsid antibodies and no positive results were detected in the Active-Treatment group. The positive neutralization response in two patients prior to the first dose may reflect preexisting cross-reactive antibodies from exposure to other seasonal coronaviruses or a prior unreported infection, despite undetectable anti-nucleocapsid antibodies.

At pre-second dose and 1-month post-primary series, neutralizing antibody levels were also higher in untreated compared to treated cohorts. In addition, healthy individuals demonstrated significantly higher neutralizing antibody levels than both cancer groups at 1-month post-primary series. The results suggest that individuals with cancer have a weakened neutralizing antibody response than healthy individuals, and active cancer treatment could further impair the response. Some studies suggest that even after booster vaccination, cancer patients who received anti-cancer treatment within 3–6 months still exhibit significantly lower antibody responses compared to those who were not on recent treatment, although antibody responses are improved compared to primary series. These findings suggest that delaying vaccination until several months after anti-cancer treatment could be beneficial.

Further studies are needed to compare neutralizing antibody responses in cancer cohorts who received the initial vaccine during treatment followed by boosters, especially those who received boosters after treatment completion, versus those who received delayed initial vaccination until after treatment completion. This may help determine whether initial suboptimal responses in cancer cohorts can be effectively enhanced by subsequent doses. Additionally, different vaccine platforms may induce varying levels of antibody binding, functional neutralizing antibody titers, and T cell responses, as they elicit immune responses via distinct mechanisms. Whether the effects observed with mRNA vaccines can extend to other vaccine platforms remains unclear, as platform-specific immunogenicity may influence antibody quantity and quality elicited in immunocompromised populations.

Studies suggest that the antibody responses to COVID-19 vaccination are significantly impaired in individuals with hematological cancers compared to those with solid cancer. However, whether ongoing anti-cancer treatment influences these responses within each group is still not fully understood. Some studies suggest that individuals with solid cancer receiving anti-cancer treatment may be more likely to be non-responsive to vaccination (seronegative) compared to those not undergoing treatment. Conversely, one study found no significant difference in neutralizing responses between treated and untreated solid cancer cohorts. In addition, individuals with hematological cancers receiving B-cell depletion therapy have shown reduced neutralizing antibody responses. Here, the influence of active treatment on the neutralizing antibody responses to vaccination in individuals with different cancer types was evaluated across different time points. Significantly higher neutralizing antibody titers were observed in the Non-Active-Treatment cancer group compared to the Active-Treatment cancer group within solid cancer cohort at two timepoints: pre-second vaccine dose and 1-month post-primary series. These findings suggest that active cancer treatment in solid cancer cohort could impair the production of neutralizing antibodies. No significant differences were observed across the timepoints for individuals with hematological cancer, which might be due to the small sample size in this group. Besides the cancer type, anti-cancer treatments influence the vaccine-induced immune response as well. Chemotherapy and combination therapy could result in reduced neutralizing antibody production, which might be due to impaired activation and memory formation, while immunotherapy may modulate immune responses differently. In our study, we further compared Active-Treatment and Non-Active-Treatment participants within each treatment type, specifically combination therapy, chemotherapy, and immunotherapy. Participants receiving combination therapy or chemotherapy generally exhibited lower neutralizing antibody responses at pre-second dose and 1-month post-primary series. Despite the challenges posed by the small sample size, these analyses highlighted the importance of understanding the influence of treatment history, cancer type, and treatment regimens to better inform vaccination strategies for individuals with cancer.

A strong correlation between anti-spike IgG levels and neutralizing antibody titers has been reported, indicating that anti-spike IgG could serve as a useful surrogate marker for immune protection against SARS-CoV-2. The trends in neutralizing antibody observed in this study align with the anti-spike IgG level trends from our previous study within the same cohort, further supporting the utility of anti-spike IgG as an indicator of vaccine-induced immune response. These findings also indicate that the cancer cohort undergoing active treatment exhibits impairments not only in binding antibody response level but also in functional neutralizing capacity. To further understand if anti-spike IgG levels can reliably reflect neutralizing activity among different groups, we examined their association with Spearman’s rank correlation and quantified the relationship through linear mixed-effects modeling. All groups showed a strong overall correlation; however, the healthy group exhibited the steepest regression slope, followed by the Non-Active-Treatment cancer group then the Active-Treatment cancer group. Although the overall slope differences did not reach statistical significance (p = .073), the trend toward a difference between healthy individuals and individuals undergoing active cancer treatment (p = .060) warrants further investigation with larger cohorts. Several studies also suggested that avidity, reflecting the strength of antigen-antibody binding, increases with time and may better indicate long-term protection. In our study, healthy individuals exhibited a significant negative correlation, which is consistent with previous reports that early plasmablast-derived antibodies can drive high titers before avidity matures. In contrast, Active-Treatment cancer group exhibited a moderate and borderline-significant positive correlation between neutralizing antibody titers and avidity, suggesting that quantity and functional quality of antibodies are jointly impaired under systemic anti-cancer therapy. Together, these findings highlight potential differences in overall quality and effectiveness of humoral immune response in individuals with cancer undergoing active treatment and underscore the importance of complementing binding antibody assays with functional assessments, particularly in immunocompromised populations, when evaluating vaccine-induced immunity or immune durability.

This study had several limitations, most notably the small sample size, which limited the ability to perform more detailed subgroup analyses based on cancer subtypes or specific treatment regimens. Moreover, the smaller sample size may introduce greater variability in correlation and regression analyses, potentially obscuring modest relationships. Therefore, future studies with larger cohorts will be essential to validate these observations. It is also important to note that healthy control samples were drawn from a previously published cohort and only available post-vaccination, limiting baseline comparisons with cancer patients. While participants were matched as closely as possible by age and sex at birth to minimize confounding, residual effects due to age or other unmeasured factors cannot be fully excluded and should be considered when interpreting comparisons between healthy controls and cancer patients. Additionally, all participants had only received the primary vaccine series without any boosters, which limits the relevance of the findings to the evolving current vaccination practices, involving many boosters. Moreover, the PBNA assay in this study utilized the ancestral D614G strain, which does not capture immune responses against more recent variants such as Omicron and its sublineages, which exhibit significant immune escape. Consequently, the results primarily reflect the vaccine-induced neutralizing response against the original viral strain rather than more current variant-specific protection. Finally, this study focused on humoral immune responses and did not assess T-cell immunity, which may play an important role in protection, particularly in individuals with impaired antibody responses. Future longitudinal studies with larger cohorts, booster doses, variant-updated pseudoviruses, and both humoral and cellular immunity assessments will provide a more comprehensive view into durability, breadth, and evolution of vaccine-induced protection across different populations and different treatment regimens.

Conclusion

This study provided valuable insights into the immune responses to the primary COVID-19 vaccination series in individuals diagnosed with cancer, both with and without ongoing or recent exposure to systemic treatments. The findings suggest that cancer treatment timing may significantly influence the immune response to vaccination. Specifically, individuals who have completed treatment at or more than 6 months prior to primary vaccine series appeared to have more robust responses than those undergoing active treatment. Moreover, our analysis suggested that while anti-spike IgG levels correlated strongly with neutralizing antibody titers across all groups, binding antibodies and functional neutralizing activity may be different in the cancer cohort on active treatment. In addition, the observed variation in correlation between neutralizing titers and avidity across groups suggests that not only the quantity, but also the quality and functional alignment of humoral responses may be altered by active cancer treatment. Further research, with larger sample size and follow-up time is needed to evaluate immune responses following booster doses, to better understand the antibody neutralizing responses and protection against infection in cancer cohorts in the context of therapy.

Disclosure statement

Dr. Bakouny reports Honoraria from UpToDate.
