---
pmid: '41320670'
doi: 10.1002/mbo3.70186
pmcid: PMC12665479
title: Multi-Omics Analysis Reveals OBSCN as a Key Modulator of Tumor Microenvironment,
  Microbial Signatures and Clinical Outcomes in Gastric Cancer.
authors:
- Chen Hongfang
- Zhang Xiuying
- Li Shijun
- Fang Yi
- Han Yi
- Jing Xiaoqian
journal: MicrobiologyOpen
year: 2025
month: 12
volume: '14'
issue: '6'
pages: e70186
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdfdirect/10.1002/mbo3.70186
cited_by_count: 0
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Stomach Neoplasms
- Tumor Microenvironment
- Mutation
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- Immunotherapy
- MicroRNAs
- Biomarkers, Tumor
- Multiomics
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types:
- gastric
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- OBSCN
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Ferroptosis and cancer prognosis
diseases_annotated:
- GC
- Gastric Cancer
- Tumor
- cancer
- gastric cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 0
icite_rcr: null
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Multi-Omics Analysis Reveals OBSCN as a Key Modulator of Tumor Microenvironment, Microbial Signatures and Clinical Outcomes in Gastric Cancer.

## Abstract

Emerging evidence suggests that OBSCN, a giant cytoskeletal protein gene, plays multifaceted roles in cancer progression, yet its impact on gastric cancer (GC) remains poorly understood. Through integrative analysis of multi-omics datasets, we observe a close relationship between OBSCN expression and outcome of immunotherapy. Besides, elevated expression of OBSCN strongly associated with adverse disease free survival (DFS). Tumor-resident microbes, such as Fusobacterium, can impact the expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) targeting OBSCN. In terms of genomic alterations, mutational status of OBSCN is substantially associated with the alpha- and beta-diversity of intratumoral microbiome and patients with mutated OBSCN exhibit elevated higher tumor mutational burden (TMB) and better response to immunotherapy. Furthermore, machine learning models based on the OBSCN mutation-related gene signatures (OMRGS) achieve outstanding performance in prediction of response to immune checkpoint inhibitors. In summary, our findings position OBSCN as a novel molecular nexus linking genomic alterations, intratumoral microbiome dysbiosis, and immune infiltration in GC, providing a rationale for future biomarker-driven therapeutic strategies.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
