---
pmid: '41540424'
doi: 10.1186/s12916-025-04597-8
pmcid: PMC12896146
title: 'Safety and preliminary efficacy results of IBI389, an anti-Claudin18.2×CD3
  bispecific antibody, in patients with solid tumors and gastric or gastro-esophageal
  tumors: a phase 1 dose escalation and expansion study.'
authors:
- Li Xiaoyu
- Dai Ruihong
- Xu Qi
- Guo Zengqing
- Hu Changlu
- Sun Yuping
- Niu Zuoxing
- Hao Jihui
- Zhang Mingjun
- Dai Guanghai
- Hua Dong
- Pan Yueyin
- Wang Xin
- Wei Shuqing
- Chen Xiaobing
- Wu Qian
- Zhang Yulong
- Zhou Hui
- Ying Jieer
- Zheng Li
- Bi Feng
journal: BMC medicine
year: 2026
month: 1
volume: '24'
issue: '1'
pages: '91'
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-025-04597-8
cited_by_count: 0
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Antibodies, Bispecific
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Stomach Neoplasms
- Adult
- Claudins
- Esophageal Neoplasms
- Dose-Response Relationship, Drug
- Treatment Outcome
- CD3 Complex
- Neoplasms
- Aged, 80 and over
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Clinical Trial, Phase I
- Multicenter Study
mechanisms:
- bispecific-antibody
cancer_types:
- gastric
- pancreatic
evidence_level: phase1-clinical
genes:
- gamma-glutamyltransferase
drugs:
- IBI389
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Monoclonal and Polyclonal Antibodies Research
diseases_annotated:
- CRS
- Cytokine release syndrome
- DLT
- GC/GEJC
- deaths
- gastric cancer
- gastric or gastro-esophageal tumors
- gastric/gastroesophageal junction cancer
- gastroesophageal junction cancer
- gastrointestinal solid tumors
- lymphocytopenia
- neurotoxicity
- pancreatic adenocarcinoma
- pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
- solid tumors
- toxicity
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 1
icite_rcr: null
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: true
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
biology_processes: []
resistant_states: []
pathway_targets: []
---

# Safety and preliminary efficacy results of IBI389, an anti-Claudin18.2×CD3 bispecific antibody, in patients with solid tumors and gastric or gastro-esophageal tumors: a phase 1 dose escalation and expansion study.

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND**: Claudin18.2 is a promising therapeutic target expressed in various solid tumors, particularly gastric cancer. IBI389 is a novel anti-Claudin18.2 × CD3 bispecific antibody designed to engage T cells by binding CD3 and Claudin18.2, thereby induce immune synapse formation. Herein, we report preliminary results from a phase I study to evaluate safety and efficacy of IBI389 in patients with advanced solid tumors.

**METHODS**: Eligible patients with advanced solid tumors refractory to standard treatments were enrolled. The dose escalation of IBI389 monotherapy used intra-patient dose escalation with accelerated titration (0.003/0.01/0.03/0.1/0.3/1 µg/kg Q2W) and the classical 3 + 3 design (3/5/10/30/100/300/600 µg/kg Q3W). Selected dose levels were expanded in patients with advanced gastric/gastroesophageal junction cancer (GC/GEJC) and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. The primary objective was safety. Secondary objective was efficacy assessed by investigator per RECIST v1.1 including objective response rate (ORR) and disease control rate (DCR).

**RESULTS**: A total of 121 patients with solid tumors were enrolled, comprising 23 gastric cancer, 14 gastroesophageal junction cancer, 73 pancreatic adenocarcinoma, and 11 other gastrointestinal solid tumors. No dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) was observed during escalation, and the maximum tolerated dose was not reached. Treatment-related adverse events (TRAEs) occurred in 120 patients (99.2%), with the most common grade ≥ 3 TRAE being gamma-glutamyltransferase increased (21.5%) and lymphocytopenia (14.0%) and other grade ≥ 3 TRAEs were ≤ 5%. Cytokine release syndrome (CRS) related adverse events occurred in 72 patients (59.5%), all grades 1-2 except one grade 3 event. No neurotoxicity or treatment-related deaths were observed. Among 37 patients with GC/GEJC, 27 of them expressing Claudin18.2 at levels of 2 + or 3 + ≥ 10%. In this subgroup, the ORR was 22.2% (6/27; 95% CI, 8.6-42.3) and DCR was 74.1% (20/27; 95% CI, 53.7-88.9). Median progression-free survival (PFS) was 4.3 months (95% CI, 2.7-7.2), and median overall survival (OS) was 10.3 months (95% CI, 6.6-not calculable). IBI389 exhibited dose-proportional exposure, with a terminal half-life (t1/2) ranging from 86.3 to 175.8 h.

**CONCLUSIONS**: IBI389 showed manageable safety profiles in patients with advanced solid tumors and preliminary efficacy in Claudin18.2-positive patients with GC/GEJC.

**TRIAL REGISTRATION**: www.

**CLINICALTRIALS**: gov . NCT05164458 (December 20, 2021).

## Full Text

Safety and preliminary efficacy results of IBI389, an anti-Claudin18.2×CD3 bispecific antibody, in patients with solid tumors and gastric or gastro-esophageal tumors: a phase 1 dose escalation and expansion study

Background

Claudin18.2 is a promising therapeutic target expressed in various solid tumors, particularly gastric cancer. IBI389 is a novel anti-Claudin18.2 × CD3 bispecific antibody designed to engage T cells by binding CD3 and Claudin18.2, thereby induce immune synapse formation. Herein, we report preliminary results from a phase I study to evaluate safety and efficacy of IBI389 in patients with advanced solid tumors.

Methods

Eligible patients with advanced solid tumors refractory to standard treatments were enrolled. The dose escalation of IBI389 monotherapy used intra-patient dose escalation with accelerated titration (0.003/0.01/0.03/0.1/0.3/1 µg/kg Q2W) and the classical 3 + 3 design (3/5/10/30/100/300/600 µg/kg Q3W). Selected dose levels were expanded in patients with advanced gastric/gastroesophageal junction cancer (GC/GEJC) and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. The primary objective was safety. Secondary objective was efficacy assessed by investigator per RECIST v1.1 including objective response rate (ORR) and disease control rate (DCR).

Results

A total of 121 patients with solid tumors were enrolled, comprising 23 gastric cancer, 14 gastroesophageal junction cancer, 73 pancreatic adenocarcinoma, and 11 other gastrointestinal solid tumors. No dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) was observed during escalation, and the maximum tolerated dose was not reached. Treatment-related adverse events (TRAEs) occurred in 120 patients (99.2%), with the most common grade ≥ 3 TRAE being gamma-glutamyltransferase increased (21.5%) and lymphocytopenia (14.0%) and other grade ≥ 3 TRAEs were ≤ 5%. Cytokine release syndrome (CRS) related adverse events occurred in 72 patients (59.5%), all grades 1–2 except one grade 3 event. No neurotoxicity or treatment-related deaths were observed. Among 37 patients with GC/GEJC, 27 of them expressing Claudin18.2 at levels of 2 + or 3 + ≥ 10%. In this subgroup, the ORR was 22.2% (6/27; 95% CI, 8.6–42.3) and DCR was 74.1% (20/27; 95% CI, 53.7–88.9). Median progression-free survival (PFS) was 4.3 months (95% CI, 2.7–7.2), and median overall survival (OS) was 10.3 months (95% CI, 6.6–not calculable). IBI389 exhibited dose-proportional exposure, with a terminal half-life (t1/2) ranging from 86.3 to 175.8 h.

Conclusions

IBI389 showed manageable safety profiles in patients with advanced solid tumors and preliminary efficacy in Claudin18.2-positive patients with GC/GEJC.

Trial registration

www.ClinicalTrials.gov. NCT05164458 (December 20, 2021).

Supplementary Information

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12916-025-04597-8.

Background

Claudin-18 isoform 2 (Claudin18.2) is a member of the tight junction molecule family, normally localized within the gastric mucosa. However, the development of malignancy leads to disruption of tight junctions and exposure of Claudin18.2 epitopes on the surface of tumor cells. Claudin18.2 expression has been observed in various solid tumors especially in gastroesophageal and pancreatic cancers, making it a potential novel target for anticancer therapy.

Multiple classes of therapies targeting Claudin18.2 are under development for the treatment of Claudin18.2 positive cancers, including advanced gastroesophageal adenocarcinoma, pancreatic carcinoma, and other solid tumors. Despite the exploration of multiple strategies, there remains an unmet need for novel approaches offering stronger efficacy, better durability, and more convenient application. 

Positive clinical outcomes have popularized Claudin18.2 as a novel cellular and antibody-based therapeutics. As the first Claudin18.2-targeted treatment in clinical development, zolbetuximab showed an objective response rate (ORR) of 9% in previously treated Claudin18.2-positive patients with recurrent or refractory advanced gastric cancer/gastroesophageal junction cancer (GC/GEJC). In a subgroup of patients with moderate-to-high Claudin18.2 expression in ≥ 70% of tumor cells, the ORR achieved 14%. On October 18, 2024, the FDA approved zolbetuximab with chemotherapy for gastric or gastroesophageal junction adenocarcinoma whose tumors are Claudin18.2 positive. Another treatment approach with different action mechanism, Claudin18.2-redirected chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell therapy, reached an ORR and disease control rate (DCR) of 48.6% and 73.0%, respectively, in patients with previously treated Claudin18.2-positive digestive system cancers. Compared with physician’s choice for previously treated advanced GC/GEJC, Claudin18.2 CAR T-cell therapy (satri-cel) significantly improved progression-free survival (PFS) with a manageable safety profile in a recently reported randomized, open-label, phase 2 trial. Other novel Claudin18.2-targeting approaches, such as afucosylated specific antibody, antibody–drug conjugates (ADCs), and bispecific antibodies, potentially expand the benefit of Claudin18.2-targeting therapies to a broader range of tumor types and tumors expressing lower levels of Claudin18.2.

T-cell-engaging bispecific antibodies (BsAbs), also named T-cell engager, is a novel immunotherapy which has showed potential anti-tumor efficacy in preclinical and clinical settings in a variety of tumor types. It has the unique ability to crosslink T cells and tumor cells independently of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) restriction. By simultaneously binding to antigens on tumor cells and CD3 on T cells, bispecific antibody recruit T cells to the vicinity of tumor cells, followed by T-cell activation, degranulation, and eventual elimination of tumor cells. The concept of utilizing bispecific antibodies to treat cancer was emerged in the 1980 s and has been continuously developed since then. Blinatumomab, the first-in-class bispecific T cell engager antibody against CD3 and CD19, was approved by the FDA in December 2014 for the treatment of adults with Philadelphia chromosome (Ph)-negative relapsed/refractory B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (BCP-ALL). This underscores the transformative potential of BsAbs in oncology. While BsAbs have displayed remarkable clinical efficacy in various types of hematologic malignancies, their efficacy in solid tumors remains limited and face significant challenges. Recently, the approval of the first DLL3 × CD3 BiTEs for the treatment of extensive-stage small-cell lung cancer has expanded the therapeutic scope in solid tumors.

As a well-recognized tumor-associated antigen, Claudin18.2 is a promising candidate for BiTEs exploration. Several Claudin18.2 × CD3 bispecific antibody candidates are currently under investigation, indicated that bispecific antibody targeting Claudin18.2 is a potential therapy (NCT04260191, NCT05278832, NCT05278832). IBI389 is an anti-Claudin18.2 × CD3 bispecific antibody designed to activate T cells through engagement of CD3 in the T-cell receptor complex and Claudin18.2 in tumor tissue, thereby mediating cytotoxic T-cell-mediated killing. IBI389 promotes cell lysis, protein production, inflammatory cytokines release, and T-cell proliferation, collectively contributing to the lysis of Claudin18.2 positive cells. Furthermore, IBI389 exhibits high target selectivity by not binding to Claudin18.1 and effectively kills tumor cells with low or high Claudin18.2 expression while sparing Claudin18.2-negative tumors. To enhance tumor penetration and reduce its sedimentation effect in the blood, and to increase the activation of T cells in tumor tissue, the binding force of IBI389 to human CD3 was weakened.

We initiated an open-label, multicenter, single-arm, dose-escalation, and dose-expansion phase I trial to evaluate the safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics, and preliminary anti-tumor efficacy of IBI389 in patients with advanced solid tumors including GC/GEJC. Herein, we report the safety outcomes of all patient populations and the efficacy results specifically in patients with GC/GEJC from this ongoing trial (NCT05164458).

Methods

Study design and regimen

This study is an open label, multicenter, phase Ia/Ib clinical trial designed to assess the safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics, and preliminary anti-tumor efficacy of IBI389, a Claudin18.2 × CD3 bispecific antibody in patients with advanced solid tumors. The primary objectives are to evaluate the safety and tolerability and the secondary objectives include assessing antitumor activity and pharmacokinetics characteristics of IBI389.

This study comprises two stages: dose escalation and dose expansion. A rapid titration combined with classical “3 + 3” dose escalation design was employed during the dose escalation phase, encompassing 13 dosage groups: 0.003 µg/kg, 0.01 µg/kg, 0.03 µg/kg, 0.1 µg/kg, 0.3 µg/kg, 1 µg/kg, 3 µg/kg, 5 µg/kg, 10 µg/kg, 30 µg/kg, 100 µg/kg, 300 µg/kg, and 600 µg/kg. Intra-patient dose escalation was used for the 0.003 µg/kg, 0.01 µg/kg, 0.03 µg/kg, 0.1 µg/kg, 0.3 µg/kg, and 1 µg/kg dose groups. The first subject received 0.003 µg/kg and 0.01 µg/kg IBI389 on day 1 and day 15, respectively. The second subject received 0.03 µg/kg and 0.1 µg/kg IBI389 on day 1 and day 15, respectively. The third subject received 0.3 µg/kg and 1 µg/kg IBI389 on day 1 and day 15, respectively. The 3 subjects received the higher doses Q2W since day 28. if subjects in this phase developed Grade ≥ 2 TRAEs during the DLT observation period, a “3 + 3” dose escalation will be adopted start with the lower dose of the group. For 3 µg/kg, 10 µg/kg, and 30 µg/kg, classical “3 + 3” single-dose escalation was used, the DLT observation window is 28 days after the first dose. One dose will be administered during the DLT observation period. After the end of DLT observation period, IBI389 will be administered Q3W. A “step-up dosing” mode was applied to dose groups of 30 μg/kg and above (both single-dose escalation and “step-up dosing” were used in 30 μg/kg). Subjects will receive 10 μg/kg as the priming dose on day 1, then received the first full dose (30 μg/kg or above) at day 15, then received the full dose every 2 or 3 weeks since day 28 until disease progression, intolerable toxicities, withdrawal of informed consent, or other reasons necessitating treatment discontinuation, with a maximum treatment duration of 24 months (whichever occurs first).

In dose expansion phase, the dosage was determined based on the results of the dose escalation study. If an efficacy is observed during dose escalation, the lowest dose group demonstrating such a signal will be identified as the lowest effective dose. Dose expansion will commence from the lowest effective dose up to the highest dose group whose safety has been confirmed. Each dose group may include up to 40 additional subjects. The dose groups of 3 µg/kg, 10 µg/kg, 30 µg/kg, 100 µg/kg, 300 µg/kg, 600 µg/kg Q3W, and 600 µg/kg Q2W were explored during the dose expansion phase.

Procedures

The timing of IBI389 infusion was specified by the protocol: In the dose groups of 0.003 µg/kg, 0.01 µg/kg, and 0.03 µg/kg, slow intravenous injection was required, the injection time of 0.003 µg/kg was within 2–10 min, and that of 0.01 µg/kg and 0.03 µg/kg was controlled within 20 ± 5 min. Participants in the 0.1 μg/kg and higher dose groups received intravenous infusion. Specifically, infusion durations were as follows:

For the 0.1 μg/kg and 0.3 μg/kg dose groups, total infusion time was ≥ 30 min. For the 1 μg/kg dose group, total infusion time was ≥ 60 min. For all dose groups of 3 μg/kg and above, total infusion time was ≥ 120 min.

During the study process, pre-treatment recommendations for cytokine release syndrome (CRS) were adopted. (a) Antipyretic and analgesic drugs (eg, acetaminophen 500 to 1000 mg orally) were administered 0.5 to 1 h before IBI389 administration; (b) At least 1 antihistamine (e.g., 25 to 50 mg orally or intravenously) 0.5 to 1 h before IBI389 administration; (c) Hydration with at least 1000 ml of crystalloid solution (e.g., normal saline) need to be administered within 30 min before, during, and after IBI389 administration, and the infusion rate was to be adjusted by the investigator as appropriate for the subject (usually over 2–4 h). (d) Pretreatment with an intravenous corticosteroid (e.g., dexamethasone 5–10 mg or equivalent dose of another corticosteroid) 60 min (± 10 min) prior to the first IBI389 dose in the single-dose escalation stage, 60 min (± 10 min) prior to the first 2 IBI389 doses in the “step-up dosing” stage. For the second full dose of “step-up dosing” and thereafter, if significant CRS and gastrointestinal reactions do not occur after the previous dose, the investigator may reduce or stop the pretreatment corticosteroid at his/her discretion. Pre-treatment of tocilizumab was not required but prepared for each subject in case the necessary.

Bedside electrocardiogram (ECG) was used to monitor the vital signs of subjects participating in the dose-escalation phase of DLT observation during the first cycle of each dose of IBI389. Electrocardiographic monitoring was recommended for 12 h after the priming dose and the first full dose administration/visit in the step-up dosing phase.

Patients

Subjects with locally advanced, recurrent, or metastatic solid tumors (excluding lung cancer) were included. Tumor samples of subjects were collected for Claudin18.2 protein expression, but bot required for the dosage group of ≤ 1 µg/kg and 3 µg/kg. GC/GEJC patients must have received at least two lines of prior standard therapy, while pancreatic cancer patients must have received at least one line. Eligibility criteria for phase Ia and Ib are as follows: provision of written informed consent and ability to comply with the protocol’s required visits and procedures; age ≥ 18 years old; expected lifespan ≥ 12 weeks, with an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of 0 or 1; adequate bone marrow, liver, renal, and coagulation function; measurable target lesions according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors, Version 1.1(RECIST V1.1). 

Safety evaluation

All adverse events were recorded in accordance with the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, (NCI CTCAE) v5.0. The incidence, severity, and relationship with IBI389 of treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs), treatment-related adverse events (TRAEs), and serious adverse event (SAE) were documented and evaluated. Vital signs, physical examination, and laboratory test results were compared and recorded. Changes in the results of the laboratory examination were also assessed. Subjects who discontinue IBI389 treatment will undergo a safety follow-up within 3 months, followed by survival follow-up. If a new anti-tumor therapy is initiated before this 3-month period, survival follow-up will commence immediately.

Anti-tumor efficacy assessment

Anti-tumor efficacy was assessed by investigators per RECIST v1.1 including objective response rate (ORR), disease control rate (DCR), duration of response (DOR), progression free survival (PFS), and overall survival (OS).

PK characteristics

Blood samples were collected pre- and post-IBI389 infusion according to the protocol. PK characteristics, including but not limited to area under curve (AUC), peak concentration (Cmax), clearance (CL), volume of distribution (Vz), and half-life (t1/2) of single and multiple doses of IBI389, were evaluated. 

Biomarker evaluation

The expression levels of Claudin18.2 in tumor tissues before IBI389 treatment were detected via immunohistochemical staining at a central lab using the VENTANA CLDN18 Assay (Cat number: 08504148001/790–7027, Roche Diagnostics GmbH) following the manufacturer’s protocol. The proportion and intensity of positive cells in the tumor were evaluated according to the staining, which was observed under the microscope by a pathologist who is blind to the clinical information. A tumor cell membrane stained at any intensity higher than background was considered positive, categorized as 1 + (weak positive, yellow to light brown staining); 2 + (moderate positive, brown staining); or 3 + (strong positive, dark brown staining). The proportion of tumor-positive cells was calculated as the number of Claudin18.2 positive tumor cells divided by the total number of tumor cells, multiplied by 100%. 

Statistical analysis

Continuous variables were described using case numbers, mean, standard deviation, median, minimum, and maximum values, alone with geometric mean and coefficient of variation for blood drug concentration and PK parameters. Categorical variables were described using frequency and percentage.

For anti-tumor efficacy analysis, RECIST V1.1 criteria were applied to evaluate ORR, DCR, and their 95% confidence interval in subjects with advanced solid tumors. Median duration of response (DOR) and median time to response (TTR) were calculated for subjects achieving objective response. Kaplan–Meier analysis was used to estimate median PFS, median OS, and 6-month and 1-year PFS and OS rates.

Descriptive statistics were adopted for safety analysis (AEs, lab tests, vital signs, etc.) and exploratory analysis (Claudin18.2 expression levels). The analysis sets included followings: Safety set, defined as all participants who received ≥ 1 dose of study drug. Efficacy evaluable analysis set, defined as participants who had ≥ 1 post-baseline tumor assessment. PFS is defined as the time from the first date of study drug administration to disease progression or death due to any reason, whichever comes first. PFS will be censored at the last adequate tumor assessment date if a participant missed ≥ 12 consecutive assessments or started any anti-tumor therapy.

Results

Patient demographics

A total of 230 patients were screened, and ultimately, 121 were enrolled in this study. Among them, 26 patients were assigned to the dose escalation cohort, while 95 were allocated to the dose expansion cohort. The distribution of patients across dosage group is detailed in Figure 1. All patients were diagnosed with advanced tumors in the digestive system, including pancreatic cancer (n = 73, 60.3%), gastric cancer (n = 23, 19.0%), gastroesophageal junction cancer (n = 14, 11.6%), and less than 10% of patients with biliary tract cancer, colorectal cancer, or liver cancer.

All patients exhibited distant metastasis and were classified as having stage IV disease. Most patients had received at least two lines of prior anticancer therapy, with specific distributions as follows: 42 (34.7%) received two lines, 27 (22.3%) received three lines, 20 (16.5%) received four lines, and 12 (9.9%) received five or more lines of therapy. Claudin18.2 expression levels were assessed in 95% of the patients, with H scores and Claudin18.2 2+ and 3+ levels recorded. The median follow-up time was 10 months, with a range of 2.0–18.2 months. Detailed information is presented in Table 1. The baseline characteristics for GC/GEJC cohort was presented in Table S1. 

Safety

In the dose escalation phase, 26 subjects were included, and no dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs) were observed. The maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of IBI389 was not reached. The safety analysis included all 121 patients, of whom 120 (99.2%) experienced treatment-related adverse events (TRAEs). The most common TRAEs included pyrexia (n = 56, 46.3%), increased aspartate aminotransferase (n = 55, 45.5%), increased alanine aminotransferase (n = 54, 44.6%), decreased appetite (n = 54, 44.6%), and increased gamma-glutamyltransferase (n = 50, 41.3%). Grade ≥ 3 TRAE mainly occurred in increased gamma-glutamyltransferase (21.5%) and lymphocytopenia (14.0%). The incidence of other grade ≥ 3 TRAEs was ≤ 5%. Additional details are provided in Tables 2 and 3. 

CRS events occurred in 72 patients (59.5%), with all cases being grade 1 or 2 except for one subject who developed grade 3 CRS and received tocilizumab treatment, leading to treatment interruption. No grade 4 or 5 CRS was observed, and the incidence and severity of CRS decreased with repeated dosing. Notably, no neurotoxicity or treatment-related deaths were reported. Details are presented in Table S2.

Anti-tumor efficacy

Among the 37 patients with GC/GEJC, 27 (73%) expressed Claudin18.2 at levels of 2 + or 3 + ≥ 10%. Of these 27 patients, 6 (22.2%) achieved partial response (PR), 13 (48.1%) has stable disease, 1 patient had non-complete response/non- progressive disease (Non-CR/Non-PD) (3.7%), 6 (22.2%) had progressive disease, and 1 (3.7%) was not evaluable. Details are showed in Table 4. The ORR and DCR were 22.2% (6/27; 95% CI, 8.6–42.3) and 74.1% (20/27; 95% CI, 53.7–88.9), respectively. The median PFS was 4.3 months (95% CI, 2.7–7.2), with a 6-month PFS rate of 35.8% (95% CI, 17.1%, 55.1%) and a 12-month PFS rate of 25.6% (95% CI, 9.8%, 45.0%). The median OS was 10.3 months (95% CI, 6.6–not calculable), with a 6-month OS rate of 77.2% (95% CI, 56.0%, 89.1%), and a 12-month OS rate of 26.7% (95% CI, 7.5%, 51.0%). Detailed information is presented in Fig. 2, including swimmer plots, waterfall plots and spider plots, as well as Fig. 3 which displays Kaplan–Meier survival curves for both PFS and OS. Tables S3 and S4 provide detailed PFS and OS data. 

These preliminary results suggest that IBI389 demonstrates promising efficacy with an acceptable safety profile in heavily pretreated patients with Claudin18.2-positive digestive system cancers, particularly those with GC/GEJC.

Pharmacokinetics (PK)

IBI389 demonstrated dose-proportional exposure. The geometric mean Cmax ranged from 79.6 ng/mL (3 μg/kg) to 11,504.7 ng/mL (600 μg/kg), with moderate-to-high interindividual variability (geometric CV, 13.7–81.2%). Systemic exposure (AUCinf) increased significantly with dose, ranging from 11,520.7 ng·h/mL (3 μg/kg) to 1,560,813 ng·h/mL (600 μg/kg).

Clearance (CL) remained relatively low, ranging from 0.00026 L/h/kg (3 μg/kg) to 0.000636 L/h/kg (100 μg/kg). The volume of distribution ranged from 0.0611 (L/kg) to 0.0792 (L/kg). The terminal half-life (t1/2) ranges from 86.3 to 175.8 h, indicating prolonged elimination, though variability is high (geometric CV, 22.7–76.6%). The time-concentration curve of IBI389 is presented in Fig. 4, and the details of PK parameters are presented in Table 5.

Discussion

This phase I study evaluated the safety, tolerability, and antitumor efficacy of IBI389, a novel anti-Claudin18.2 × CD3 bispecific antibody, in patients with solid tumors, including GC/GEJC. Safety analysis indicated that IBI389 exhibited favorable safety profiles and was generally well tolerated. The initial efficacy analysis in patients with GC/GEJC demonstrated promising antitumor efficacy, supporting further investigation.

A total of 121 patients with various digestive system cancers were included in the safety analysis across both the dose escalation and dose expansion cohorts. Among all TRAEs, pyrexia, abnormal liver function (including increased aspartate aminotransferase and increased alanine aminotransferase), and decreased appetite were most common. Although these AEs occurred at a high incidence, their severity was predominantly grade 1 or 2. For TRAEs of grade 3 or higher, increased gamma-glutamyl transferase, lymphocytopenia, and decreased appetite were the most frequent.

It is well established that Claudin18.2 exhibits high expression in short-lived differentiated gastric mucosal cells, raising concerns regarding off-tumor toxicities and potential gastrointestinal reactions during therapies targeting Claudin18.2. Claudin18.2 is constitutively expressed in normal gastric mucosal epithelium, with its expression abundance significantly higher than other tissues. Therefore, different Claudin18.2 expressions in tumor tissues will not cause significant differences in the on-target off-tumor toxicity of IBI389. Even if the tumor tissue does not express Claudin 18.2, as long as the patient has normal gastric mucosa, IBI389 will still cause on-target off-tumor toxicity. The off-target toxicity of IBI389 is mainly CRS and liver function abnormal, most of which are grades 1–2. Currently, no difference in the incidence of CRS and liver function abnormalities has been found between populations with Claudin 18.2 high (Claudin 18.2 IHC 2/3 + ≥ 75%) and low (Claudin 18.2 IHC 2/3 + < 75%) expression (details are presented in Table S5 and Table S6). In this study, the incidence rate of gastrointestinal reactions was 82.6% (100/121). The TRAEs included gastrointestinal mucosal exfoliation, erosive gastritis, and other mucosal injury-related digestive AEs. Although the overall incidence was 82.6%, only 26 patients (21.5%) experienced grade 3 TRAEs, with no grade 4 or grade 5 events reported. Furthermore, with appropriate management, most AEs were effectively controlled, and subjects recovered within 2 weeks and tolerated repeated infusions. The potential higher selectivity and optimized molecular design may contribute to favorable tolerability profile of IBI389.

As a bispecific antibody targeting Claudin18.2 and CD3, IBI389 mobilizes the T-cells directly at the tumor cells interface, resulting in diverse immune responses and AEs. CRS was one of the most common AEs and highly correlated with treatment dose intensity. Arthur G’eraud et al. reported that the incidence of ≥ 3 grade CRS in 2050 patients receiving treatments such as Blinatumomab, Teclistamab, Tebentafusp, and several other T-cell engager (TCE) products was 2.2%. Compared to the incidence of ≥ 3 grade CRS (8.8%, 143/1627) observed with CAR-T cell products, the severity of CRS in TCE products was lower. In this study, most CRS levels were grade 1 or 2. Only one patient (0.8%) experienced grade 3 CRS, which occurred on study day 3 after the first dose, presented as pyrexia and hypoxemia requiring noninvasive mask ventilation, after tocilizumab treatment, the patients recovered to grade 2 on day 6, then grade 1 on day 7, and resolved on day 37. It is noteworthy that the limited patient number and dose escalation design may have contributed to the relatively lower incidence. Among the 121 patients in this study, no neurotoxicity was observed. The safety data indicated that the safety profile of IBI389 is generally acceptable and manageable.

Claudin18.2 is widely expressed and represents a promising therapeutic target for gastric cancer. Previous studies have reported Claudin18.2 expression frequencies ranging from 14.1% to 95% in GC/GEJC, depending on the definition of Claudin18.2 positivity. Study heterogeneity, driven by diverse IHC protocols—such as differing primary antibodies, dilution levels, and scoring approaches—could influence collective outcomes. Generally, antitumor efficacy was associated with Claudin18.2 expression levels, which served as a critical factor in the inclusion criteria. In prior clinical trials, inclusion criteria for Claudin18.2 expression levels varied. For instance, in a phase IIa study of zolbetuximab, an anti-Claudin18.2 monoclonal antibody, patients with moderate-to-strong Claudin18.2 expression in ≥ 50% of tumor cells were included, achieving an ORR of 9% (4/43), with all responders exhibiting moderate-to-high Claudin18.2 expression in ≥ 70% of tumor cells. In a phase I trial of Claudin18.2 CAR-T therapy CT041, an H score was adopted, and patients with low or higher expression included, where low expression was defined as any intensity with < 40% tumor cell involvement or intensity 1 + with any percentage. In a phase I study of CMG901, a Claudin18.2-directed ADC, 41% of patients in the dose escalation cohort and 84% in the dose expansion had Claudin18.2 expression of ≥ 2 + in ≥ 20% of tumor cells. These findings highlight the antitumor efficacy in patients with high Claudin18.2 expression; however, treatment opportunities for patients with relatively low expression levels are remain clinically significant.

In this study, we evaluated the antitumor efficacy of IBI389 in 37 patients with GC/GEJC, among whom 27 (73%) exhibited Claudin18.2 expression at levels of 2 + or 3 + in ≥ 10% of tumor cells. Among these 27 patients, the ORR and DCR were 22.2% and 74.1%, respectively. Subgroup analysis of efficacy showed that only when patients with ≥ 10% Claudin18.2 expression showed slightly better efficacy than that of the entire population. Further increasing Claudin18.2 expression did not lead to a significant improvement in therapeutic effect. These data suggest that IBI389 may hold potential as a therapeutic option for patients with relatively “low” Claudin18.2 expression, thereby providing an alternative strategy.

The PK profiles of IBI389 shows a dose-proportional exposure and relatively low clearance. The long half-life supports less frequent dosing, while high variability in exposure may require dose individualization. According to the analysis, IBI389 shows no significant exposure-safety correlation. And the sample size of efficacy data in gastric cancer was small; larger sample sizes are needed to explore the dose schedule and dose optimization.

Several limitations should be acknowledged in this study. First, during the dose escalation phase, patients with various digestive system malignancies were included, which increased population heterogeneity. Second, only Claudin18.2 biomarkers were assessed; other potentially informative markers, such as PD-L1 expression and tumor infiltrating lymphocytes, could also provide valuable insights into treatment strategies and rational combinations. Third, antitumor efficacy was evaluated exclusively in patients with Claudin18.2 expression at levels of 2 + or 3 + ≥ 10% of tumor cells; including the remaining 10 patients with lower or negative expression might have introduced additional variability into the outcome analysis. Lastly, the sample size of patients with GC/GEJC was relatively small, necessitating further investigation with a larger cohort to validate these findings.

Conclusions

This study demonstrated a manageable safety profile and preliminary antitumor activity of IBI389 in patients with digestive cancers, particularly those with positive Claudin18.2 expression. Ongoing studies are enrolling additional patients and exploring combination therapies with other regimens to further elucidate its clinical utility.

Abbreviations

ADC

Antibody-drug conjugate

AUC

Area under curve

Cmax

Peak concentration

BCP-ALL

B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia

CAR

Chimeric antigen receptor

CL

Clearance

DCR

Disease control rate

DLTs

Dose-limiting toxicities

ECOG

Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group

GC/GEJC

Gastric cancer/gastroesophageal junction cancer

MHC

Major Histocompatibility Complex

NCI CTCAE

National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events

ORR

Overall response rate

OS

Overall survival

PR

Partial response

PFS

Progression-free survival

RECIST

V1.1Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors, Version 1.1

SAE

Serious adverse event

t1/2

Half-life

TCE

T-cell engager

BsAbs

T-cell-engaging bispecific antibodies

TTR

Time to response

TEAE

Treatment emergent adverse event

TRAE

Treatment-related adverse event

Vz

Apparent volume of distribution based on the terminal elimination phase

Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Xiaoyu Li and Ruihong Dai are co-first author.

Authors’ contributions

Conception and design: LZ and FB. Provision of study materials or patients: All the authors. Collection and assembly of data: All authors. Data analysis and interpretation: XYL, RHD, JEY, LZ, and FB. Final approval of manuscript: All the authors. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Funding

This study was funded by Innovent Biologics (Suzhou) Co. Ltd.

Competing interests 

Qian Wu, Yulong Zhang, and Hui Zhou reported being employees of Innovent Biologics (Suzhou) Co. Ltd. Other authors declare no competing interests.
