---
pmid: '11509143'
doi: ''
pmcid: ''
title: '[CT appearance and its diagnosis value in liver cancer after transcatheter
  oily chemoembolization combining with high intensity focused ultrasound therapy].'
authors:
- Zhao J
- Wang Z
- Guo D
- Yu C
- Xie W
- Li G
journal: Zhonghua gan zang bing za zhi = Zhonghua ganzangbing zazhi = Chinese journal
  of hepatology
year: 2001
month: 7
volume: 9 Suppl
issue: ''
pages: 61-3
is_oa: false
oa_status: unknown
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 0
mesh_terms:
- Adult
- Aged
- Chemoembolization, Therapeutic
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Female
- Humans
- Liver Neoplasms
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Tomography, X-Ray Computed
- Ultrasonic Therapy
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- hifu
cancer_types:
- liver
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
diseases_annotated:
- liver cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 4
icite_rcr: 0.13736958066234556
icite_percentile: 6.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# [CT appearance and its diagnosis value in liver cancer after transcatheter oily chemoembolization combining with high intensity focused ultrasound therapy].

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVE**: To study the CT appearances of liver cancer after transcatheter oily chemoembolization (TOCE) combining with high intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) therapy.

**METHODS**: Fifty cases of clinically-proved liver cancer were included into this study. For each case, CT scanning before and after TOCE, HIFU treatment was performed. The volumes of the masses were measured. The appearances of the oily deposition and the density, shape, border of the lesions were observed.

**RESULTS**: The lesions became smaller in 38 cases (38/50, 76%) after the treatment. The differences were detected statistically in the ratio of the tumor shrinkage between the single TOCE therapy and the combined treatment (P<0.05). The ratio of the tumor shrinkage was closely correlative with the quantity of the oily deposition, but not with the diameter of the tumor before treatment. The lowered densities were showed in 30 cases (30/50, 60%) and the borders became regular and clear in 16 cases after HIFU therapy.

**CONCLUSIONS**: TOCE combining with HIFU therapy in the patients with liver cancer can make the tumor smaller. CT is of great value in the evaluation of efficacy and prognosis.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
