---
pmid: '17668933'
doi: 10.1177/153303460700600402
pmcid: ''
title: 'Towards solid tumor treatment by irreversible electroporation: intrinsic redistribution
  of fields and currents in tissue.'
authors:
- Esser Axel T
- Smith Kyle C
- Gowrishankar Thiruvallur R
- Weaver James C
journal: Technology in cancer research & treatment
year: 2007
month: 8
volume: '6'
issue: '4'
pages: 261-74
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 101
mesh_terms:
- Cell Death
- Cell Membrane Permeability
- Electricity
- Electroporation
- Hot Temperature
- Humans
- Neoplasms
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- electrochemical-therapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Microbial Inactivation Methods
diseases_annotated:
- electroporation
- necrosis
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 61
icite_rcr: 1.838755419893528
icite_percentile: 71.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Towards solid tumor treatment by irreversible electroporation: intrinsic redistribution of fields and currents in tissue.

## Abstract

Local and drug-free tissue treatment by irreversible electroporation (IRE) involves the creation of aqueous pores in a cell's plasma membrane (PM) and leads to non-thermal cell death by necrosis. To investigate explicit pore-based effects we use two-dimensional system models with different spatial scales. The first is a multicellular system model (spatial scale 100 mum) that has irregularly shaped cells, and quantitatively describes dynamic (creation and destruction, evolution in pore size) pore behavior at the PM. The second is a tissue model (spatial scale 200 mm) that is constructed from a unit cell and uses the asymptotic (fixed pore size) electroporation model. Both system models show that significant redistribution of fields and currents occurs through transient PM pores. Pore histograms for the multicellular model demonstrate the simultaneous presence of small and large pores during IRE pulses. The associated significant increase of PM permeability may prove to be essential to understanding how cell death by necrosis occurs. The averaged tissue conductivity in both models increases during IRE pulses because of electroporation. This leads to greater electrical dissipation (heating) and, thus, to larger temperature increases than suggested by tissue models with passive and static electrical properties.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
