---
pmid: '18242358'
doi: 10.1016/j.urology.2007.09.020
pmcid: ''
title: Indications for extended 14-core transrectal ultrasound-guided prostate biopsy.
authors:
- Uno Hiromi
- Nakano Masahiro
- Ehara Hidetoshi
- Deguchi Takashi
journal: Urology
year: 2008
month: 1
volume: '71'
issue: '1'
pages: 23-7
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 16
mesh_terms:
- Aged
- Aged, 80 and over
- Biopsy, Needle
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Staging
- Prospective Studies
- Prostate-Specific Antigen
- Prostatic Neoplasms
- Surgery, Computer-Assisted
- Ultrasonography
- Ultrasound, High-Intensity Focused, Transrectal
pub_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
mechanisms: []
cancer_types:
- prostate
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- PSA
- prostate-specific antigen
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Prostate Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment
diseases_annotated:
- Prostate cancer
- cancer
- cancers
- prostate cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 11
icite_rcr: 0.31609389347585654
icite_percentile: 16.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Indications for extended 14-core transrectal ultrasound-guided prostate biopsy.

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVES**: We compared the cancer detection rate of extended 14-core biopsy with that of sextant biopsy to assess whether additional biopsy cores are useful for detection of prostate cancer and to clarify the indications for obtaining additional cores.

**METHODS**: Study subjects were 313 patients who underwent transrectal ultrasound-guided 14-core biopsy because of a prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level greater than 4.0 ng/mL and/or abnormalities found on digital rectal examination (DRE). In addition to the standard 6 biopsy cores, 6 lateral cores were obtained as well as 2 transition zone cores. PSA density (PSAD) was determined as the total PSA level divided by the prostate volume as estimated by transrectal ultrasound.

**RESULTS**: Prostate cancer was diagnosed in 127 patients (40.6%). In 28 (22%) patients, the cancer would not have been detected by the sextant method alone. Among 211 patients with normal DRE findings, the cancer detection rate with 14-core biopsy was statistically higher than that with 6-core biopsy in the 141 patients with a PSA level of 4.01 ng/mL to 10.0 ng/mL, and 14 (38.9%) of 36 cancers were diagnosed in additional cores only, not in the standard sextant biopsy cores. Among the 141 patients with a gray-zone PSA level, the cancer detection rate with extended biopsy was statistically higher in those with PSAD greater than 0.13 ng/mL.

**CONCLUSIONS**: Lateral biopsy should be used in conjunction with sextant biopsy in patients with a PSA level of 4.01 ng/mL to 10.0 ng/mL with normal DRE findings, especially in those with PSAD greater than 0.13 ng/mL.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
