---
pmid: '22616177'
doi: ''
pmcid: ''
title: '[Effect of pulsed electromagnetic field with different frequencies on the
  proliferation, apoptosis and migration of human ovarian cancer cells].'
authors:
- Wang Qian
- Wu Wenchao
- Chen Xiaoying
- He Chenqi
- Liu Xiaojing
journal: Sheng wu yi xue gong cheng xue za zhi = Journal of biomedical engineering
  = Shengwu yixue gongchengxue zazhi
year: 2012
month: 4
volume: '29'
issue: '2'
pages: 291-5
is_oa: false
oa_status: unknown
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 0
mesh_terms:
- Apoptosis
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Cell Movement
- Cell Proliferation
- Cystadenocarcinoma, Serous
- Electromagnetic Fields
- Female
- Humans
- Ovarian Neoplasms
pub_types:
- English Abstract
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- frequency-therapy
cancer_types:
- ovarian
evidence_level: preclinical-invitro
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
diseases_annotated:
- ectomy of ovarian cancer
- osteoporosis
- ovarian cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 5
icite_rcr: 0.12994463422427524
icite_percentile: 6.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# [Effect of pulsed electromagnetic field with different frequencies on the proliferation, apoptosis and migration of human ovarian cancer cells].

## Abstract

Pulsed electromagnetic field (PEMF), a non-invasive physical treatment modality, is now used clinically to promote bone formation for osteoporosis. The patients after ectomy of ovarian cancer are easily complicated with osteoporosis. However, the safety parameters of PEMF treatment for the osteoporosis patients after resection of ovarian cancer remain unknown. Therefore, this study was designed to examine the effect of different frequency of PEMF on the proliferation, apoptosis and migration of human ovarian cancer cells (SKOV3 cells). Cultured SKOV3 cells were exposed to PEMF stimulation daily with radiation of 8 Hz, 16 Hz, 32 Hz and 64 Hz, respectively. We used sinusoidal waves with strength of 1 mT, twice a day with an interval of 12 hours. An exposure to the waves lasted 30 minutes, for 3 days, with those no PEMF stimulation serving as the control. The proliferation of cells was detected using EdU assay, and the apoptosis of cell was assessed with Annexin V-FITC fluorescence. The migration of cells was measured with the scratch wound assay. The data showed that exposure to PEMF of 1 mT, 8 Hz for 3 days could significantly inhibit the proliferation of SKOV3 cells and induce the apoptosis of the cells. The migrated distance and number were increased by 1 mT, 8 Hz or 32 Hz PEMF stimulation, but decreased by 1 mT, 16 Hz treatment. The results suggested that we should be careful about the safety of PEMF treatment and strictly choose the optical parameters in preventing or treating the osteoporosis of the patients after resection of ovarian cancer.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
