---
pmid: '23199931'
doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2012.09.017
pmcid: PMC3491727
title: A three-dimensional in vitro tumor platform for modeling therapeutic irreversible
  electroporation.
authors:
- Arena Christopher B
- Szot Christopher S
- Garcia Paulo A
- Rylander Marissa Nichole
- Davalos Rafael V
journal: Biophysical journal
year: 2012
month: 11
volume: '103'
issue: '9'
pages: 2033-42
is_oa: true
oa_status: bronze
oa_url: http://www.cell.com/article/S0006349512010326/pdf
cited_by_count: 107
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Cell Death
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Collagen Type I
- Electromagnetic Fields
- Electroporation
- Hydrogels
- Mice
- Neoplasms, Experimental
- Phenotype
- Temperature
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
mechanisms:
- electrochemical-therapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Microbial Inactivation Methods
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 77
icite_rcr: 2.5788128116934366
icite_percentile: 81.4
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# A three-dimensional in vitro tumor platform for modeling therapeutic irreversible electroporation.

## Abstract

Irreversible electroporation (IRE) is emerging as a powerful tool for tumor ablation that utilizes pulsed electric fields to destabilize the plasma membrane of cancer cells past the point of recovery. The ablated region is dictated primarily by the electric field distribution in the tissue, which forms the basis of current treatment planning algorithms. To generate data for refinement of these algorithms, there is a need to develop a physiologically accurate and reproducible platform on which to study IRE in vitro. Here, IRE was performed on a 3D in vitro tumor model consisting of cancer cells cultured within dense collagen I hydrogels, which have been shown to acquire phenotypes and respond to therapeutic stimuli in a manner analogous to that observed in in vivo pathological systems. Electrical and thermal fluctuations were monitored during treatment, and this information was incorporated into a numerical model for predicting the electric field distribution in the tumors. When correlated with Live/Dead staining of the tumors, an electric field threshold for cell death (500 V/cm) comparable to values reported in vivo was generated. In addition, submillimeter resolution was observed at the boundary between the treated and untreated regions, which is characteristic of in vivo IRE. Overall, these results illustrate the advantages of using 3D cancer cell culture models to improve IRE-treatment planning and facilitate widespread clinical use of the technology.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
