---
pmid: '25202041'
doi: ''
pmcid: ''
title: 'Sono-photodynamic combination therapy: a review on sensitizers.'
authors:
- Sadanala Krishna Chaitanya
- Chaturvedi Pankaj Kumar
- Seo You Mi
- Kim Jeung Mo
- Jo Yong Sam
- Lee Yang Koo
- Ahn Woong Shick
journal: Anticancer research
year: 2014
month: 9
volume: '34'
issue: '9'
pages: 4657-64
is_oa: false
oa_status: unknown
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 0
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Humans
- Light
- Neoplasms
- Photochemotherapy
- Photosensitizing Agents
- Sound
- Ultrasonic Therapy
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Review
mechanisms:
- sonodynamic
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- Porphyrin
date_added: '2026-03-28'
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- cancer
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 48
icite_rcr: 1.7188278720677925
icite_percentile: 69.7
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Sono-photodynamic combination therapy: a review on sensitizers.

## Abstract

Cancer is characterized by the dysregulation of cell signaling pathways at several steps. The majority of current anticancer therapies involve the modulation of a single target. A tumor-targeting drug-delivery system consists of a tumor detection moiety and a cytotoxic material joined directly or through a suitable linker to form a conjugate. Photodynamic therapy has been used for more than 100 years to treat tumors. One of the present goals of photodynamic therapy research is to enhance the selective targeting of tumor cells in order to reduce the risk and extension of unwanted side-effects, caused by normal cell damage. Sonodynamic therapy is a promising new treatment for patients with cancer. It treats cancer with ultrasound and sonosensitive agents. Porphyrin compounds often serve as photosensitive and sonosensitive agents. The combination of these two methods makes cancer treatment more effective. The present review provides an overview of photodynamic therapy, sonodynamic therapy, sono-photodynamic therapy and the four sensitizers which are suitable candidates for combined sono-photodynamic therapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
