---
pmid: '26486331'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-22536-4_3
pmcid: ''
title: MRI-Guided HIFU Methods for the Ablation of Liver and Renal Cancers.
authors:
- de Senneville Baudouin Denis
- Moonen Chrit
- Ries Mario
journal: Advances in experimental medicine and biology
year: 2016
month: null
volume: '880'
issue: ''
pages: 43-63
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 57
mesh_terms:
- High-Intensity Focused Ultrasound Ablation
- Humans
- Kidney Neoplasms
- Liver Neoplasms
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Interventional
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- hifu
cancer_types:
- kidney
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Ultrasound and Hyperthermia Applications
diseases_annotated:
- Liver and Renal Cancers
- Liver and kidney tumors
- trauma
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 43
icite_rcr: 1.8787336709562246
icite_percentile: 72.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# MRI-Guided HIFU Methods for the Ablation of Liver and Renal Cancers.

## Abstract

MRI-guided High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (MRI-HIFU) is a promising method for the non-invasive ablation of pathological tissue in many organs, including mobile organs such as liver and kidney. The possibility to locally deposit thermal energy in a non-invasive way opens a path towards new therapeutic strategies with improved reliability and reduced associated trauma, leading to improved efficacy, reduced hospitalization and costs. Liver and kidney tumors represent a major health problem because not all patients are suitable for curative treatment with surgery. Currently, radio-frequency is the most used method for percutaneous ablation. The development of a completely non-invasive method based on MR guided high intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) treatments is of particular interest due to the associated reduced burden for the patient, treatment related patient morbidity and complication rate. The objective of MR-guidance is hereby to control heat deposition with HIFU within the targeted pathological area, despite the physiological motion of these organs, in order to provide an effective treatment with a reduced duration and an increased level of patient safety. Regarding this, several technological challenges have to be addressed: Firstly, the anatomical location of both organs within the thoracic cage requires inter-costal ablation strategies, which preserve the therapeutic efficiency, but prevent undesired tissue damage to the ribs and the intercostal muscle. Secondly, both therapy guidance and energy deposition have to be rendered compatible with the continuous physiological motion of the abdomen.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
