---
pmid: '27226207'
doi: 10.1530/ERC-16-0116
pmcid: ''
title: Evaluation of the methods to identify patients who may benefit from PARP inhibitor
  use.
authors:
- Lim Diana
- Ngeow Joanne
journal: Endocrine-related cancer
year: 2016
month: 6
volume: '23'
issue: '6'
pages: R267-85
is_oa: true
oa_status: bronze
oa_url: https://erc.bioscientifica.com/downloadpdf/journals/erc/23/6/R267.pdf
cited_by_count: 29
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Antineoplastic Agents
- BRCA1 Protein
- BRCA2 Protein
- Biomarkers
- DNA Damage
- DNA Repair
- Gene Expression
- Humans
- Mutation
- Neoplasms
- Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors
- Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerases
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- synthetic-lethality
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- BRCA
- BRCA1/2
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: PARP inhibition in cancer therapy
diseases_annotated:
- cancers
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 25
icite_rcr: 0.688856073687217
icite_percentile: 37.0
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Evaluation of the methods to identify patients who may benefit from PARP inhibitor use.

## Abstract

The effectiveness of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors (PARPi) in treating cancers associated with BRCA1/2 mutations hinges upon the concept of synthetic lethality and exemplifies the principles of precision medicine. Currently, most clinical trials are recruiting patients based on pathological subtypes or have included BRCA mutation analysis (germ line and/or somatic) as part of the selection criteria. Mounting evidence, however, suggests that these drugs may also be efficacious in tumors with defects in other genes involved in the homologous recombination repair pathway. Advances in molecular profiling techniques together with increased research efforts have led to a better understanding of the molecular aberrations underlying this BRCA-like phenotype and helped broaden the concept of BRCAness. Hence, it is likely that the list of predictive biomarkers for PARPi therapy will increase in future. There is currently no gold standard method of testing for PARPi response and no universal guidelines are in place on how to incorporate biomarker testing into routine clinical diagnostics. In this review, we explore the concept of BRCAness and highlight the different methods that have been used to identify patients who may benefit from the use of these anticancer agents. The identification of predictive biomarkers is crucial in improving patient selection and expanding the clinical applications of PARPi therapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
