---
pmid: '28635336'
doi: 10.1080/14737140.2017.1345630
pmcid: ''
title: New advances in focal therapy for early stage prostate cancer.
authors:
- Tay Kae Jack
- Schulman Ariel A
- Sze Christina
- Tsivian Efrat
- Polascik Thomas J
journal: Expert review of anticancer therapy
year: 2017
month: 8
volume: '17'
issue: '8'
pages: 737-743
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 19
mesh_terms:
- Ablation Techniques
- Antigens, Surface
- Biopsy
- Glutamate Carboxypeptidase II
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Neoplasm Staging
- Patient Selection
- Positron-Emission Tomography
- Prostatic Neoplasms
- Ultrasonography, Interventional
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms: []
cancer_types:
- prostate
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- PSMA
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Prostate Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- prostate cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 16
icite_rcr: 0.6022286707890695
icite_percentile: 32.7
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# New advances in focal therapy for early stage prostate cancer.

## Abstract

Prostate focal therapy offers men the opportunity to achieve oncological control while preserving sexual and urinary function. The prerequisites for successful focal therapy are to accurately identify, localize and completely ablate the clinically significant cancer(s) within the prostate. We aim to evaluate the evidence for current and upcoming technologies that could shape the future of prostate cancer focal therapy in the next five years. Areas covered: Current literature on advances in patient selection using imaging, biopsy and biomarkers, ablation techniques and adjuvant treatments for focal therapy are summarized. A literature search of major databases was performed using the search terms 'focal therapy', 'focal ablation', 'partial ablation', 'targeted ablation', 'image guided therapy' and 'prostate cancer'. Expert commentary: Advanced radiological tools such as multiparametric magnetic resonance imaging (mpMRI), multiparametric ultrasound (mpUS), prostate-specific-membrane-antigen positron emission tomography (PSMA-PET) represent a revolution in the ability to understand cancer function and biology. Advances in ablative technologies now provide a menu of modalities that can be rationalized based on lesion location, size and perhaps in the near future, pre-determined resistance to therapy. However, these need to be carefully studied to establish their safety and efficacy parameters. Adjuvant strategies to enhance focal ablation are under development.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
