---
pmid: '29396626'
doi: 10.1007/s00120-018-0575-9
pmcid: ''
title: '[Ablative therapy of small renal masses].'
authors:
- Kriegmair M C
- Wagener N
- Diehl S J
- Rathmann N
journal: Der Urologe. Ausg. A
year: 2018
month: 3
volume: '57'
issue: '3'
pages: 285-294
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 5
mesh_terms:
- Carcinoma, Renal Cell
- Catheter Ablation
- Cryosurgery
- High-Intensity Focused Ultrasound Ablation
- Humans
- Kidney Neoplasms
- Neoplasm Recurrence, Local
- Nephrectomy
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- electrochemical-therapy
- frequency-therapy
- hifu
cancer_types:
- kidney
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Renal cell carcinoma treatment
diseases_annotated:
- Renal cell cancer
- Tumor
- hereditary renal cell carcinomas
- metastasis
- renal mass
- renal masses
- renal tumor
- renal tumors
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 6
icite_rcr: 0.3481901337774449
icite_percentile: 18.8
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# [Ablative therapy of small renal masses].

## Abstract

Renal cell cancer is nowadays predominantly diagnosed in early stages due to the widespread use of sectional imaging for unrelated symptoms. Small renal masses (<4 cm) feature a largely indolent biology with a very low risk for metastasis or even a benign biology in up to 30% of the cases. Consequently, there is a need for less invasive therapeutic alternatives to nephron-sparing surgery. Meanwhile, there is a broad portfolio of local ablation techniques to treat small renal tumors. These include the extensively studied radiofrequency ablation and cryoablation techniques as well as newer modalities like microwave ablation and irreversible electroporation as more experimental techniques. Tumor ablation can be performed percutaneously under image guidance or laparoscopically. In particular, the percutaneous approach is a less invasive alternative to nephron-sparing surgery with lower risk for complications. Comparative studies and meta-analyses report a higher risk for local recurrence after renal tumor ablation compared to surgery. However, long-term oncological results after treatment of small renal masses are promising and do not seem to differ from partial nephrectomy. The possibility for salvage therapy in case of recurrence also accounts for this finding. Especially old patients with an increased risk of surgical and anesthesiological complications as well as patients with recurrent and multiple hereditary renal cell carcinomas may benefit from tumor ablation. Tumor biopsy prior to intervention is associated with very low morbidity rates and is oncologically safe. It can help to assess the biology of the renal mass and prevent therapy of benign lesions.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
