---
pmid: '29438676'
doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2018.02.006
pmcid: ''
title: 'Stress-induced cellular responses in immunogenic cell death: Implications
  for cancer immunotherapy.'
authors:
- Radogna Flavia
- Diederich Marc
journal: Biochemical pharmacology
year: 2018
month: 7
volume: '153'
issue: ''
pages: 12-23
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 135
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Cell Death
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress
- Humans
- Immunity, Cellular
- Immunogenetic Phenomena
- Immunotherapy
- Neoplasms
- Signal Transduction
- Stress, Physiological
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress and Disease
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- DAMP
- cancer
- hypoxic
- immunogenic
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 105
icite_rcr: 3.5940461875608847
icite_percentile: 88.3
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Stress-induced cellular responses in immunogenic cell death: Implications for cancer immunotherapy.

## Abstract

Cancer is evading the host's defense mechanisms leading to avoidance of immune destruction. During tumor progression, immune-evading cancer cells arise due to selective pressure from the hypoxic and nutrient-deprived microenvironment. Thus, therapies aiming at re-establishing immune destruction of pathological cells constitute innovating anti-cancer strategies. Accumulating evidence suggests that selected conventional chemotherapeutic drugs increase the immunogenicity of stressed and dying cancer cells by triggering a form of cell death called immunogenic cell death (ICD), which is characterized by the release of danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs). In this review, we summarize the effects of ICD inducers on DAMP signaling leading to adjuvanticity and antigenicity. We will discuss the associated stress response pathways that cause the release of DAMPs leading to improved immune recognition and their relevance in cancer immunotherapy. Our aim is to highlight the contribution of adaptive immunity to the long-term clinical benefits of anticancer treatments and the properties of immune memory that can protect cancer patients against relapse.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
