---
pmid: '29672956'
doi: 10.1002/adma.201800180
pmcid: ''
title: Metal-Organic-Framework-Derived Carbon Nanostructure Augmented Sonodynamic
  Cancer Therapy.
authors:
- Pan Xueting
- Bai Lixin
- Wang Hui
- Wu Qingyuan
- Wang Hongyu
- Liu Shuang
- Xu Bolong
- Shi Xinghua
- Liu Huiyu
journal: Advanced materials (Deerfield Beach, Fla.)
year: 2018
month: 6
volume: '30'
issue: '23'
pages: e1800180
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 493
mesh_terms:
- Carbon
- Humans
- Metal-Organic Frameworks
- Nanostructures
- Neoplasms
- Porphyrins
- Reactive Oxygen Species
- Ultrasonic Therapy
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
- sonodynamic
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- Carbon
- MOF
- Metal-Organic-Framework
- ROS
- carbon
- metal
- metal-organic-framework
- porphyrin
- reactive oxygen species
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 299
icite_rcr: 11.45831402516559
icite_percentile: 98.3
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Metal-Organic-Framework-Derived Carbon Nanostructure Augmented Sonodynamic Cancer Therapy.

## Abstract

Sonodynamic therapy (SDT) can overcome the critical issue of depth-penetration barrier of photo-triggered therapeutic modalities. However, the discovery of sonosensitizers with high sonosensitization efficacy and good stability is still a significant challenge. In this study, the great potential of a metal-organic-framework (MOF)-derived carbon nanostructure that contains porphyrin-like metal centers (PMCS) to act as an excellent sonosensitizer is identified. Excitingly, the superior sonosensitization effect of PMCS is believed to be closely linked to the porphyrin-like macrocycle in MOF-derived nanostructure in comparison to amorphous carbon nanospheres, due to their large highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO)-lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) gap for high reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. The nanoparticle-assisted cavitation process, including the visualized formation of the cavitation bubbles and microjets, is also first captured by high-speed camera. High ROS production in PMCS under ultrasound is validated by electron spin resonance and dye measurement, followed by cellular destruction and high tumor inhibition efficiency (85%). This knowledge is important from the perspective of understanding the structure-dependent SDT enhancement of a MOF-derived carbon nanostructure.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
