---
pmid: '29797927'
doi: 10.13201/j.issn.1001-1781.2016.11.004
pmcid: ''
title: '[The application of radiofrequency ablation in the resection of lateral skull
  base tumor through an endoscopic endonasal approach].'
authors:
- Wang Z L
- Zhang Q H
- Li M C
- Yan B
- Lv H L
- Liu J Q
- Xu C
journal: Lin chuang er bi yan hou tou jing wai ke za zhi = Journal of clinical otorhinolaryngology
  head and neck surgery
year: 2016
month: 6
volume: '30'
issue: '11'
pages: 856-860
is_oa: false
oa_status: unknown
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 0
mesh_terms: []
pub_types:
- English Abstract
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- frequency-therapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
diseases_annotated:
- blood loss
- cerebrospinal fluid leak
- death
- dissecting aneurysm
- lateral skull base tumor
- meningitis
- neurological deficit
- skull base tumor
- skull base tumors
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 0
icite_rcr: 0.0
icite_percentile: 0.0
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# [The application of radiofrequency ablation in the resection of lateral skull base tumor through an endoscopic endonasal approach].

## Abstract

Objective:To summarize our experience of resecting tumors in lateral skull base via a radiofrequency ablation-assisted endoscopic approach to investigate the safety and feasibility of the technique and to assess its treatment outcomes.Method:Twelve patients with lateral skull base tumor were operated through a radiofrequency ablationassisted endoscopic transnasal or transoral approach. In this study, the operative technique was described,and the degree of resection, complications and the clinical outcomes was analyzed.Result:Complete resection was achieved in all patients using this technique. No patient in the series experienced a new neurological deficit, cerebrospinal fluid leak or meningitis after surgery. One patient suffered from dissecting aneurysm on 4th day after operation. And the dissecting aneurysm were treated by vascular interventional therapy. No recurrence and death related skull base tumor in the follow-up period(28-30 months) were found. The volume of intraoperative blood loss was from 60 ml to 500 ml(medium 190 ml). The duration of operations was from 60 min to 180 min(medium 95 min).Conclusion:Our limited experience indicates that this technique is feasible and safe for the complete resection of some skull base tumors in selected cases.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
