---
pmid: '29951296'
doi: 10.21037/jtd.2018.05.107
pmcid: PMC5994496
title: Combining immunotherapy and radiotherapy in lung cancer.
authors:
- Bhalla Neeraj
- Brooker Rachel
- Brada Michael
journal: Journal of thoracic disease
year: 2018
month: 5
volume: '10'
issue: Suppl 13
pages: S1447-S1460
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://jtd.amegroups.com/article/viewFile/21367/pdf
cited_by_count: 69
mesh_terms: []
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types:
- lung
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer Immunotherapy and Biomarkers
diseases_annotated:
- NSCLC
- lung cancer
- metastatic lesions
- non-small cell lung cancer
- tumour
- tumours
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 55
icite_rcr: 1.7818527187848952
icite_percentile: 70.8
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Combining immunotherapy and radiotherapy in lung cancer.

## Abstract

Immunotherapy has become standard of care in advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in a number of settings. Radiotherapy remains an important and potentially curative treatment for localized and locally advanced NSCLC not amenable to surgery. While the principal cytotoxic effect of ionizing radiation is via DNA damage, the effect on tumour microenvironment, promoting dendritic cell presentation of tumour-derived antigens to T cells stimulating the host adaptive immune system to mount an immune response against tumours cells, has become of particular interest when combining immunomodulating agents with radiation. The 'abscopal effect' of radiation where non-irradiated metastatic lesions may respond to radiation may be immune-mediated, via radiation primed anti-tumour T cells. Immune priming by radiation offers the potential for increasing the efficacy of immunotherapy and this is subject to on-going clinical trials underpinned by immunological bioassays. Increasing understanding of the interaction between tumour, radiation and immune cells at a molecular level provides a further opportunity for intervention to enhance the potential synergy between radiation and immunotherapy. Applying the potential efficacy of combination therapy to clinical practice requires caution particularly to ensure the safety of the two treatment modalities in early phase clinical trials, many of which are currently underway. We review the biological basis for combining radiation and immunotherapy and examine the existing pre-clinical and clinical evidence and the challenges posed by the new combination of treatments.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
