---
pmid: '30762908'
doi: 10.1002/adma.201805888
pmcid: ''
title: Tumor Microenvironment-Activatable Prodrug Vesicles for Nanoenabled Cancer
  Chemoimmunotherapy Combining Immunogenic Cell Death Induction and CD47 Blockade.
authors:
- Zhou Fangyuan
- Feng Bing
- Yu Haijun
- Wang Dangge
- Wang Tingting
- Ma Yuting
- Wang Siling
- Li Yaping
journal: Advanced materials (Deerfield Beach, Fla.)
year: 2019
month: 4
volume: '31'
issue: '14'
pages: e1805888
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 500
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- CD47 Antigen
- Cell Death
- Humans
- Immunotherapy
- Nanostructures
- Prodrugs
- Tumor Microenvironment
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- CD47
drugs:
- OXA
- PEGylated
- oxaliplatin
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- Tumor
- cancer
- tumor
- tumor metastasis
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 357
icite_rcr: 11.838104475234477
icite_percentile: 98.4
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Tumor Microenvironment-Activatable Prodrug Vesicles for Nanoenabled Cancer Chemoimmunotherapy Combining Immunogenic Cell Death Induction and CD47 Blockade.

## Abstract

Chemoimmunotherapy is reported to activate a robust T cell antitumor immune response by triggering immunogenic cell death (ICD), which has initiated a number of clinical trials. However, current chemoimmunotherapy is restricted to a small fraction of patients due to low drug delivery efficacy and immunosuppression within the tumor microenvironment. A tumor microenvironment-activatable prodrug vesicle for cancer chemoimmunotherapy using ICD is herein reported. The prodrug vesicles are engineered by integrating an oxaliplatin (OXA) prodrug and PEGylated photosensitizer (PS) into a single nanoplatform, which show tumor-specific accumulation, activation, and deep penetration in response to the tumoral acidic and enzymatic microenvironment. It is demonstrated that codelivery of OXA prodrug and PS can trigger ICD of the tumor cells by immunogenic cells killing. The combination of prodrug vesicle-induced ICD with Î ± CD47-mediated CD47 blockade further facilitates dendritic cell (DC) maturation, promotes antigen presentation by DCs, and eventually propagates the antitumor immunity of ICD. CD47 blockade and ICD induction efficiently inhibit the growth of both primary and abscopal tumors, suppress tumor metastasis, and prevent tumor recurrence. Collectively, these results imply that boosting antitumor immunity using ICD induction and suppressing tumor immune evasion via CD47 blockade might be promising for improved cancer chemoimmunotherapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
