---
pmid: '31916125'
doi: 10.1007/s10439-019-02445-4
pmcid: ''
title: Optimizing Integrated Electrode Design for Irreversible Electroporation of
  Implanted Polymer Scaffolds.
authors:
- Pelaez Francisco
- Shao Qi
- Ranjbartehrani Pegah
- Lam Tiffany
- Lee Hak Rae
- O'Flanagan Stephen
- Silbaugh Abby
- Bischof John C
- Azarin Samira M
journal: Annals of biomedical engineering
year: 2020
month: 4
volume: '48'
issue: '4'
pages: 1230-1240
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 5
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Biocompatible Materials
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Electric Conductivity
- Electrodes
- Electroporation
- Female
- Melanoma, Experimental
- Mice, Inbred C57BL
- Polyesters
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- electrochemical-therapy
- immunotherapy
cancer_types:
- melanoma
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs:
- PCL
- Polymer
- poly(caprolactone)
- stainless steel
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Microbial Inactivation Methods
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 4
icite_rcr: 0.29068996231490785
icite_percentile: 15.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Optimizing Integrated Electrode Design for Irreversible Electroporation of Implanted Polymer Scaffolds.

## Abstract

Irreversible electroporation (IRE) is an emerging technology for non-thermal ablation of solid tumors. This study sought to integrate electrodes into microporous poly(caprolactone) (PCL) scaffolds previously shown to recruit metastasizing cancer cells in vivo in order to facilitate application of IRE to disseminating cancer cells. As the ideal parallel plate geometry would render much of the porous scaffold surface inaccessible to infiltrating cells, numerical modeling was utilized to predict the spatial profile of electric field strength within the scaffold for alternative electrode designs. Metal mesh electrodes with 0.35 mm aperture and 0.16 mm wire diameter established electric fields with similar spatial uniformity as the parallel plate geometry. Composite PCL-IRE scaffolds were fabricated by placing cylindrical porous PCL scaffolds between two PCL dip-coated stainless steel wire meshes. PCL-IRE scaffolds exhibited no difference in cell infiltration in vivo compared to PCL scaffolds. In addition, upon application of IRE in vivo, cells infiltrating the PCL-IRE scaffolds were successfully ablated, as determined by histological analysis 3 days post-treatment. The ability to establish homogeneous electric fields within a biomaterial that can recruit metastatic cancer cells, especially when combined with immunotherapy, may further advance IRE technology beyond solid tumors to the treatment of systemic cancer.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
