---
pmid: '32242788'
doi: 10.2174/1871520620666200403144945
pmcid: ''
title: A Review of Chemotherapy and Photodynamic Therapy for Lung Cancer Treatment.
authors:
- El-Hussein Ahmed
- Manoto Sello L
- Ombinda-Lemboumba Saturnin
- Alrowaili Ziyad A
- Mthunzi-Kufa Patience
journal: Anti-cancer agents in medicinal chemistry
year: 2021
month: null
volume: '21'
issue: '2'
pages: 149-161
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 119
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Cell Death
- Humans
- Lung Neoplasms
- Photochemotherapy
- Photosensitizing Agents
- Reactive Oxygen Species
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms: []
cancer_types:
- lung
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- ROS
- Reactive Oxygen Species
- oxygen
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Photodynamic Therapy Research Studies
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- Lung Cancer
- cancer
- cancers
- death
- lung cancer
- malignant
- neoplasia
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 110
icite_rcr: 7.758433240833935
icite_percentile: 96.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# A Review of Chemotherapy and Photodynamic Therapy for Lung Cancer Treatment.

## Abstract

Cancer is among the leading causes of mortality and morbidity worldwide. Among the different types of cancers, lung cancer is considered to be the leading cause of death related to cancer and the most commonly diagnosed form of such disease. Chemotherapy remains a dominant treatment modality for many types of cancers at different stages. However, in many cases, cancer cells develop drug resistance and become nonresponsive to chemotherapy, thus, necessitating the exploration of alternative and /or complementary treatment modalities. Photodynamic Therapy (PDT) has emerged as an effective treatment modality for various malignant neoplasia and tumors. In PDT, the photochemical interaction of light, Photosensitizer (PS) and molecular oxygen produces Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS), which induces cell death. Combination therapy, by using PDT and chemotherapy, can promote synergistic effect against this fatal disease with the elimination of drug resistance, and enhancement of the efficacy of cancer eradication. In this review, we give an overview of chemotherapeutic modalities, PDT, and the different types of drugs associated with each therapy. Furthermore, we also explored the combined use of chemotherapy and PDT in the course of lung cancer treatment and how this approach could be the last resort for thousands of patients that have been diagnosed by this fatal disease.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
