---
pmid: '32451769'
doi: 10.1007/s10147-020-01704-y
pmcid: ''
title: 'Photodynamic diagnosis and therapy for urothelial carcinoma and prostate cancer:
  new imaging technology and therapy.'
authors:
- Fukuhara Hideo
- Yamamoto Shinkuro
- Karashima Takashi
- Inoue Keiji
journal: International journal of clinical oncology
year: 2021
month: 1
volume: '26'
issue: '1'
pages: 18-25
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 39
mesh_terms:
- Aminolevulinic Acid
- Carcinoma, Transitional Cell
- Humans
- Male
- Photochemotherapy
- Photosensitizing Agents
- Prostatic Neoplasms
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms: []
cancer_types:
- bladder
- prostate
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- 5-Aminolevulinic acid
- ALA
- PpIX
- protoporphyrin IX
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Bladder and Urothelial Cancer Treatments
diseases_annotated:
- bladder cancer
- cancer
- malignancies
- mitochondrial damage
- prostate cancer
- tumor
- tumor lesion
- urothelial carcinoma
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 30
icite_rcr: 2.2342854195638036
icite_percentile: 77.7
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Photodynamic diagnosis and therapy for urothelial carcinoma and prostate cancer: new imaging technology and therapy.

## Abstract

Photodynamic technology using light-sensitive and fluorescent substances has an important role in an accurate diagnosis for a variety of malignancies, including bladder cancer and prostate cancer. Light-sensitive and fluorescent substances accumulate specifically in tumor cells compared to normal tissue, and by light irradiation and excitation at each specific wavelength, tumor lesion, blood flow, lymph node and so on show fluorescence. 5-Aminolevulinic acid (ALA) is converted to protoporphyrin IX (PpIX) into mitochondria. PpIX is excited by blue light, red fluorescence is emitted in the mitochondria. This phenomenon is the mechanism of ALA-mediated photodynamic diagnosis (ALA-PDD). ALA-PDD has made it possible to visualize smaller lesions and flat lesions that were previously difficult to visualize by endoscope using a white-light source. So accurate diagnosis and complete resection become possible during operation. The accumulation of PpIX in the mitochondria also induces direct mitochondrial damage and subsequent cell death by red and green light. This biological reaction is the ALA-mediate photodynamic therapy (ALA-PDT). ALA-PDT has been developed as a modality for minimum invasive cancer treatment that utilizes low-energy light and photosensitizer. Vascular-activated photosensitizer induces rapid tumor ablation by PDT involving direct tumor cell killing as well as damage to the exposed microvasculature. We summarize the clinical outcomes of PDD and PDT for urothelial carcinoma and prostate cancer.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
