---
pmid: '32477443'
doi: 10.1063/5.0008462
pmcid: PMC7237222
title: Thermoplastic microfluidic bioreactors with integrated electrodes to study
  tumor treating fields on yeast cells.
authors:
- Gencturk Elif
- Ulgen Kutlu O
- Mutlu Senol
journal: Biomicrofluidics
year: 2020
month: 5
volume: '14'
issue: '3'
pages: '034104'
is_oa: true
oa_status: green
oa_url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/7237222
cited_by_count: 8
mesh_terms: []
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- ttfields
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invitro
genes:
- Nop56
drugs:
- Au
- Cr
- cyclo-olefin polymer
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Microfluidic and Bio-sensing Technologies
diseases_annotated:
- Tumor
- cancer
- cancerous
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 5
icite_rcr: 0.35728736289494845
icite_percentile: 19.3
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Thermoplastic microfluidic bioreactors with integrated electrodes to study tumor treating fields on yeast cells.

## Abstract

Tumor-treating fields (TTFields) are alternating electrical fields of intermediate frequency and low intensity that can slow or inhibit tumor growth by disrupting mitosis division of cancerous cells through cell cycle proteins. In this work, for the first time, an in-house fabricated cyclo-olefin polymer made microfluidic bioreactors are integrated with Cr/Au interdigitated electrodes to test TTFields on yeast cells with fluorescent protein:Nop56 gene. A small gap between electrodes (50 μm) allows small voltages (<150 mV) to be applied on the cells; hence, uninsulated gold electrodes are used in the non-faradaic region without causing any electrochemical reaction at the electrode-medium interface. Electrochemical modeling as well as impedance characterization and analysis of the electrodes are done using four different cell nutrient media. The experiments with yeast cells are done with 150 mV, 150 kHz and 30 mV, 200 kHz sinusoidal signals to generate electrical field magnitudes of 6.58 V/cm and 1.33 V/cm, respectively. In the high electrical field experiment, the cells go through electroporation. In the experiment with the low electrical field magnitude for TTFields, the cells have prolonged mitosis from typical 80-90 min to 200-300 min. Our results confirm the validity of the electrochemical model and the importance of applying a correct magnitude of the electrical field. Compared to the so far reported alternatives with insulated electrodes, the here developed thermoplastic microfluidic bioreactors with uninsulated electrodes provide a new, versatile, and durable platform for in vitro cell studies toward the improvement of anti-cancer therapies including personalized treatment.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
