---
pmid: '32481997'
doi: 10.1039/c2bm00066k
pmcid: ''
title: Titanium dioxide nanoparticle-entrapped polyion complex micelles generate singlet
  oxygen in the cells by ultrasound irradiation for sonodynamic therapy.
authors:
- Harada Atsushi
- Ono Masafumi
- Yuba Eiji
- Kono Kenji
journal: Biomaterials science
year: 2013
month: 1
volume: '1'
issue: '1'
pages: 65-73
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 88
mesh_terms: []
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
- sonodynamic
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- 1O2
- ROS
- TiO2
- Titanium dioxide
- poly(ethylene glycol)
- polyallylamine
- polyion complex
- reactive oxygen species
- singlet oxygen
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- cytotoxic
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 48
icite_rcr: 1.3863602802485087
icite_percentile: 62.2
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Titanium dioxide nanoparticle-entrapped polyion complex micelles generate singlet oxygen in the cells by ultrasound irradiation for sonodynamic therapy.

## Abstract

A new modality of using ultrasound irradiation instead of photoactivation, as in photodynamic therapy (PDT), sonodynamic therapy, has emerged as a promising treatment for various types of cancer. Titanium dioxide (TiO2) has the ability to generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) by not only photo- but also ultrasound-irradiation. Here, the formation of core-shell type polyion complex micelles from TiO2 nanoparticles with polyallylamine bearing poly(ethylene glycol) grafts effectively improves the dispersion stability of the TiO2 nanoparticles under physiological conditions for therapeutic application. The TiO2 nanoparticles in the micelles can generate ROS including singlet oxygen (1O2) by sonication. Furthermore, the micelles are taken up into HeLa cells and the TiO2 nanoparticles generate 1O2, which is widely believed to be the main cytotoxic agent in PDT, even in the cells treated by sonication. This is the first result representing 1O2 generation of TiO2 nanoparticles in HeLa cells by sonication. Further, the micelles can selectively exhibit a cell-killing effect at only the ultrasound-irradiated area.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
