---
pmid: '32767235'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-43085-6_5
pmcid: ''
title: Oncolytic Viruses and Their Potential as a Therapeutic Opportunity in Osteosarcoma.
authors:
- Wedekind Mary Frances
- Cripe Timothy P
journal: Advances in experimental medicine and biology
year: 2020
month: null
volume: '1258'
issue: ''
pages: 77-89
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 6
mesh_terms:
- Bone Neoplasms
- Humans
- Oncolytic Virotherapy
- Oncolytic Viruses
- Osteosarcoma
- Tumor Microenvironment
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- oncolytic-virus
cancer_types:
- sarcoma
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Virus-based gene therapy research
diseases_annotated:
- Osteosarcoma
- cancer
- infection
- osteosarcoma
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 5
icite_rcr: 0.266576333335023
icite_percentile: 14.1
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Oncolytic Viruses and Their Potential as a Therapeutic Opportunity in Osteosarcoma.

## Abstract

Osteosarcoma remains an unmet medical need. Oncolytic viruses are gaining traction as novel cancer therapeutics. These viruses are either naturally nonpathogenic or engineered to be safe by specific genetic deletions yet retain the ability to infect and kill human cancer cells and elicit anticancer immunity. Some versions are being specifically designed and tested in patients with osteosarcoma, though due to their generalized mechanism of action most are being tested in patients across a broad range of cancer types. The activity of these viruses is impacted not only by the susceptibility of tumor cells to infection but also by the tumor microenvironment (TME) and by tumor immunogenicity. Here we review the field of oncolytic viruses with a particular emphasis on highlighting any available data in preclinical osteosarcoma models or in patients with osteosarcoma. While in general the viruses have been shown safe to administer to patients by a variety of routes, their therapeutic efficacy to date has been limited. Given the low rate of adverse events and the likely absence of long-term side effects, the utility of oncolytic viruses will most likely be realized when used in combination with other agents.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
