---
pmid: '32786087'
doi: 10.1111/and.13789
pmcid: ''
title: A systematic review of irreversible electroporation in localised prostate cancer
  treatment.
authors:
- Morozov Andrey
- Taratkin Mark
- Barret Eric
- Singla Nirmish
- Bezrukov Evgeniy
- Chinenov Denis
- Enikeev Mikhail
- Gomez Rivas Juan
- Shpikina Anastasia
- Enikeev Dmitry
journal: Andrologia
year: 2020
month: 11
volume: '52'
issue: '10'
pages: e13789
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 18
mesh_terms:
- Ablation Techniques
- Electroporation
- Humans
- Male
- Neoplasm Recurrence, Local
- Prostatic Neoplasms
- Treatment Outcome
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Systematic Review
mechanisms:
- electrochemical-therapy
cancer_types:
- prostate
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- PSA
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Microbial Inactivation Methods
diseases_annotated:
- Clavien
- Dindo I-II
- cancer
- prostate cancer
- sexual and urinary toxicity
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 13
icite_rcr: 0.6294101990326257
icite_percentile: 34.1
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# A systematic review of irreversible electroporation in localised prostate cancer treatment.

## Abstract

Irreversible electroporation is a treatment option used for focal therapy. In this systematic review, we summarise data on irreversible electroporation outcomes in patients with localised prostate cancer. We performed a literature search in 3 databases and included articles with own data on irreversible electroporation results in patients with localised prostate cancer. Primary outcome was procedure efficacy measured as the absence of cancer in the treatment area on the follow-up biopsy. Secondary outcomes were the absence of prostate cancer recurrence in the treatment area on MRI, out-of-field recurrence, complications and functional outcomes (erectile function and micturition). In-field recurrence rate was 0%-39% and out-field 6.4%-24%. In all studies, PSA level decreased: twice lower than baseline after 4 weeks and by 76% after 2 years. Most of the authors noted sexual and urinary toxicity during the first half year after surgery. However, functional outcomes recovered to baseline after 6 months with mild decrease in sexual function. Complication rates after irreversible electroporation were 0%-1% of Clavien-Dindo III and 5%-20% of Clavien-Dindo I-II. Irreversible electroporation has promise oncological outcomes, rate of post-operative complications and minimal-to-no effects on erectile and urinary function. However, medium and long-term data on cancer-specific and recurrence-free survival are still lacking.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
