---
pmid: '33163283'
doi: ''
pmcid: PMC7642665
title: Inhibition of AURKB, regulated by pseudogene MTND4P12, confers synthetic lethality
  to PARP inhibition in skin cutaneous melanoma.
authors:
- Guo Yan
- Wei Qi
- Tan Linghui
- Li Yadan
- Li Jingyi
- Li Ling
- Jiang Tingting
- Zhang Shuzhen
- Jin Hongchuan
journal: American journal of cancer research
year: 2020
month: null
volume: '10'
issue: '10'
pages: 3458-3474
is_oa: false
oa_status: unknown
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 0
mesh_terms: []
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- synthetic-lethality
cancer_types:
- melanoma
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes:
- AURKB
- MTND4P12
- PARP
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
diseases_annotated:
- SKCM
- cancer
- melanoma
- skin cutaneous melanoma
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 7
icite_rcr: 0.34973057974162947
icite_percentile: 18.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Inhibition of AURKB, regulated by pseudogene MTND4P12, confers synthetic lethality to PARP inhibition in skin cutaneous melanoma.

## Abstract

Despite significant advances, skin cutaneous melanoma (SKCM) is a common life-threatening cancer worldwide. Recently, pseudogenes have been discovered to be functional in many physiological processes and the pathogenesis of various diseases, including cancer. However, their relevance to SKCM remains largely unknown. In this study, seven upregulated pseudogenes were identified based on TCGA data. Among them, MTND4P12 was negatively correlated with the overall survival of SKCM patients. After constructing a pseudogene-miRNA-mRNA regulatory network, MTND4P12 was found to regulate the expression of oncogene AURKB by serving as a ceRNA. Both genetic and chemical inhibition of AURKB reduced viability and induced apoptosis of melanoma cells. Interestingly, DNA repair pathway seems to be involved in the anti-tumor effect of AURKB inhibition. Indeed, a synergistic therapeutic effect of AURKB inhibition and PARP inhibitor was confirmed both in vitro and in vivo. In conclusion, AURKB plays an oncogenic role and is a novel therapeutic target in SKCM. The combination of AURKB inhibition and PARP inhibitor has a synergistic effect, representing a promising treatment for SKCM.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
