---
pmid: '33349536'
doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2020.112907
pmcid: ''
title: Highly sensitive and stable self-powered biosensing for exosomes based on dual
  metal-organic frameworks nanocarriers.
authors:
- Gu Chengcheng
- Bai Lipeng
- Pu Li
- Gai Panpan
- Li Feng
journal: Biosensors & bioelectronics
year: 2021
month: 3
volume: '176'
issue: ''
pages: '112907'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 217
mesh_terms:
- Bioelectric Energy Sources
- Biosensing Techniques
- Exosomes
- Glucose 1-Dehydrogenase
- Metal-Organic Frameworks
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- bioelectric
- nanoparticle
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- GDH
- GDH@ZIF-8
- glucose dehydrogenase
drugs:
- K3[Fe(CN)6]
- MOFs
- UiO-66-NH2
- ZIF-8
- metal-organic frameworks
- zeolitic imidazolate framework-8
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Advanced Nanomaterials in Catalysis
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 109
icite_rcr: 8.086638209808873
icite_percentile: 96.8
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Highly sensitive and stable self-powered biosensing for exosomes based on dual metal-organic frameworks nanocarriers.

## Abstract

Biofuel cells (BFCs)-based self-powered biosensors suffer from the limited stability of bioenzymes. Meanwhile, the poor performance of self-powered biosensors affects the sensitivity of biosensing, thus, it is significant and challenging to improve their stability and sensitivity. In our work, a BFC-based self-powered biosensor, with simultaneously enhanced stability and sensitivity, was constructed utilizing dual metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) as the carriers of the bioenzyme and the electroactive probe, respectively. Anodic enzyme, glucose dehydrogenase (GDH), was encapsulated in zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8) to form GDH@ZIF-8 composites, enhancing the catalytic activity and stability of GDH. Meanwhile, another zirconium metal-organic frameworks (UiO-66-NH2) loaded with electroactive molecules (K3[Fe(CN)6]) served as nano-enrichment carriers and improved the capability of the cathode to accept electrons from the anode, further improving the sensitivity of the as-proposed biosensor. Herein, the "signal-on" BFC-based self-powered biosensing of exosomes, the model analyte, with excellent stability and outstanding sensitivity was realized with the assistance of dual MOFs, and the detection limit was down to 300 particles mL-1 (based on 3s/k), which was superior to those previously reported in literatures. Furthermore, the developed protocol was capable of detecting exosomes derived from cancer cells in complex biological samples. Overall, in this work the enhancement of both stability and sensitivity has been achieved by utilizing two types of MOFs, which laid the foundation for expanding the applications of BFC-based self-powered biosensors.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
