---
pmid: '34058542'
doi: 10.1016/j.bioelechem.2021.107847
pmcid: ''
title: Contactless delivery of plasmid encoding EGFP in vivo by high-intensity pulsed
  electromagnetic field.
authors:
- Kranjc Matej
- Kranjc Brezar Simona
- Serša Gregor
- Miklavčič Damijan
journal: Bioelectrochemistry (Amsterdam, Netherlands)
year: 2021
month: 10
volume: '141'
issue: ''
pages: '107847'
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioelechem.2021.107847
cited_by_count: 12
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Electromagnetic Fields
- Female
- Green Fluorescent Proteins
- Humans
- Melanoma, Experimental
- Mice
- Mice, Inbred C57BL
- Muscle, Skeletal
- Plasmids
- Skin
- Transfection
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- frequency-therapy
cancer_types:
- melanoma
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes:
- MCAM
drugs:
- PEMF
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Microbial Inactivation Methods
diseases_annotated:
- inflammatory
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 5
icite_rcr: 0.5408179490244504
icite_percentile: 29.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Contactless delivery of plasmid encoding EGFP in vivo by high-intensity pulsed electromagnetic field.

## Abstract

High-Intensity Pulsed Electromagnetic Fields (HI-PEMF) treatment is an emerging noninvasive and contactless alternative to conventional electroporation, since the electric field inside the tissue is induced remotely by external pulsed magnetic field. Recently, HI-PEMF was applied for delivering siRNA molecules to silence enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) in tumors in vivo. Still, delivered siRNA molecules were 21 base pairs long, which is 200-times smaller compared to nucleic acids such as plasmid DNA (pDNA) that are delivered in gene therapies to various targets to generate therapeutic effect. In our study, we demonstrate the use HI-PEMF treatment as a feasible noninvasive approach to achieve in vivo transfection by enabling the transport of larger molecules such as pDNA encoding EGFP into muscle and skin. We obtained a long-term expression of EGFP in the muscle and skin after HI-PEMF, in some mice even up to 230 days and up to 190 days, respectively. Histological analysis showed significantly less infiltration of inflammatory mononuclear cells in muscle tissue after the delivery of pEGFP using HI-PEMF compared to conventional gene electrotransfer. Furthermore, the antitumor effectiveness using HI-PEMF for electrotransfer of therapeutic plasmid, i.e., silencing MCAM was demonstrated. In conclusion, feasibility of HI-PEMF was demonstrated for transfection of different tissues (muscle, skin, tumor) and could have great potential in gene therapy and in DNA vaccination.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
