---
pmid: '34092568'
doi: 10.11477/mf.1436204436
pmcid: ''
title: '[Glioblastoma].'
authors:
- Tanaka Shota
journal: No shinkei geka. Neurological surgery
year: 2021
month: 5
volume: '49'
issue: '3'
pages: 623-631
is_oa: false
oa_status: unknown
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 0
mesh_terms:
- Brain Neoplasms
- Glioblastoma
- Humans
- Japan
- Neoplasm Recurrence, Local
- Temozolomide
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- ttfields
cancer_types:
- glioblastoma
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs:
- Bevacizumab
- NovoTTF
- Perampanel
- lacosamide
- levetiracetam
- talaporfin sodium
- temozolomide
date_added: '2026-03-28'
diseases_annotated:
- Glioblastoma
- brain tumor
- epilepsy
- glioblastoma
- glioma
- malignant glioma
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 1
icite_rcr: 0.08926145689401137
icite_percentile: 4.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# [Glioblastoma].

## Abstract

Glioblastoma, the most malignant and most common form of glioma, is known to portend very poor prognosis with the median overall survival of approximately 1.5 years. Its treatment requires a multidisciplinary approach, which consists of maximal safe resection followed by radiotherapy and chemotherapy with temozolomide. Bevacizumab is approved for newly diagnosed as well as recurrent malignant glioma in Japan. NovoTTF is a novel medical device that emits alternating electric fields; it inhibits the proliferation and growth of the tumor by interfering with tumor cell mitosis at anaphase. A photodynamic therapy with talaporfin sodium has been approved for primary malignant brain tumor including glioblastoma in Japan. For epilepsy secondary to glioblastoma, a novel class of antiepileptics such as levetiracetam and lacosamide is preferred given the lack of drug-drug interactions. Perampanel is a selective antagonist of AMPA receptors, the major subtype of ionotropic glutamate receptors; it may be a preferred antiepileptics for glioblastoma, given the in vitro and in vivo analyses suggesting that it decreases the proliferation and invasion of tumor cells. In this chapter, I describe the overview of the multidisciplinary treatments of glioblastoma. I also describe the future perspectives.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
