---
pmid: '34133161'
doi: 10.1021/acs.jafc.1c01173
pmcid: ''
title: 'Phytocompounds Targeting Metabolic Reprogramming in Cancer: An Assessment
  of Role, Mechanisms, Pathways, and Therapeutic Relevance.'
authors:
- Khan Asifa
- Siddiqui Shumaila
- Husain Syed Akhtar
- Mazurek Sybille
- Iqbal Mohammad Askandar
journal: Journal of agricultural and food chemistry
year: 2021
month: 6
volume: ''
issue: ''
pages: ''
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 26
mesh_terms: []
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- metabolic-targeting
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- Phytocompounds
- phytocompounds
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer, Hypoxia, and Metabolism
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 21
icite_rcr: 1.661517514624369
icite_percentile: 68.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Phytocompounds Targeting Metabolic Reprogramming in Cancer: An Assessment of Role, Mechanisms, Pathways, and Therapeutic Relevance.

## Abstract

The metabolism of cancer is remarkably different from that of normal cells and confers a variety of benefits, including the promotion of other cancer hallmarks. As the rewired metabolism is a near-universal property of cancer cells, efforts are underway to exploit metabolic vulnerabilities for therapeutic benefits. In the continued search for safer and effective ways of cancer treatment, structurally diverse plant-based compounds have gained substantial attention. Here, we present an extensive assessment of the role of phytocompounds in modulating cancer metabolism and attempt to make a case for the use of plant-based compounds in targeting metabolic vulnerabilities of cancer. We discuss the pharmacological interactions of phytocompounds with major metabolic pathways and evaluate the role of phytocompounds in the regulation of growth signaling and transcriptional programs involved in the metabolic transformation of cancer. Lastly, we examine the potential of these compounds in the clinical management of cancer along with limitations and challenges.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
