---
pmid: '34249464'
doi: ''
pmcid: PMC8263666
title: Irreversible electroporation enhances immunotherapeutic effect in the off-target
  tumor in a murine model of orthotopic HCC.
authors:
- Shi Xiaoju
- O'Neill Conor
- Wang Xingtong
- Chen Yujia
- Yu Youxi
- Tan Min
- Lv Guoyue
- Li Yan
- Martin Robert C
journal: American journal of cancer research
year: 2021
month: null
volume: '11'
issue: '6'
pages: 3304-3319
is_oa: false
oa_status: unknown
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 0
mesh_terms: []
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- electrochemical-therapy
- immunotherapy
cancer_types:
- liver
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
diseases_annotated:
- HCC
- Hepatocellular carcinoma
- inflammatory
- necrosis
- tumor
- tumor necrosis
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 18
icite_rcr: 1.2411121418766864
icite_percentile: 58.2
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Irreversible electroporation enhances immunotherapeutic effect in the off-target tumor in a murine model of orthotopic HCC.

## Abstract

Irreversible electroporation (IRE) has been postulated to have an off-target effect on lesions not in the tumor-ablative field, possibly through heightened immunologic response. In this study, we evaluated whether combination IRE and immunotherapy would lead to increased tumor necrosis and T cell recruitment to both the treated tumors and tumors outside the local ablative field. An in vitro cell-IRE model was established to evaluate the ability of T lymphocytes (EL4 cell and HH cells) migration in response to Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells (Hepa1-6 and HepG2) with IRE treatment. An orthotopic HCC mouse model was established by implantation of 1mm^3 sections of Hepa1-6 tumor tissues into the right and left lobes of the liver. The Hepa1-6 cells and HepG2 cells with IRE treatment increased the migration ability of EL4 cell and HH cells, specifically when they were pretreated with immunotherapeutic agents in vitro. In the orthotopic HCC mouse model, IRE+immunotherapy treatment enhanced the necrosis and subpopulation of infiltrated CD8 positive cells, but attenuated the tumor associated inflammatory cells in both IRE target tumor tissues and IRE off-target tumor tissues from the mice with 4 weeks of immunotherapy following IRE. This study provided the evidence that combination of IRE and immunotherapy enhances tumor necrosis and immune responses, not only in the IRE-treated tumor but also in the off-target tumor.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
