---
pmid: '34375182'
doi: 10.2174/0929867328666210810160901
pmcid: ''
title: 'Recent Advances in Lung Cancer Therapy Based on Nanomaterials: A Review.'
authors:
- Gholami Leila
- Ivari Jalil Rouhani
- Nasab Niloofar Khandan
- Oskuee Reza Kazemi
- Sathyapalan Thozhukat
- Sahebkar Amirhossein
journal: Current medicinal chemistry
year: 2023
month: null
volume: '30'
issue: '3'
pages: 335-355
is_oa: true
oa_status: green
oa_url: https://hull-repository.worktribe.com/output/4163190
cited_by_count: 18
mesh_terms:
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Dendrimers
- Liposomes
- Quality of Life
- Lung Neoplasms
- Developed Countries
pub_types:
- Review
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types:
- lung
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- lipids
- polymers
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoparticle-Based Drug Delivery
diseases_annotated:
- Lung Cancer
- Lung cancer
- cancer
- cancers
- death
- lung cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 15
icite_rcr: 2.6460655870911367
icite_percentile: 82.1
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Recent Advances in Lung Cancer Therapy Based on Nanomaterials: A Review.

## Abstract

Lung cancer is one of the commonest cancers with a significant mortality rate for both genders, particularly in men. Lung cancer is recognized as one of the leading causes of death worldwide, which threatens the lives of over 1.6 million people every day. Although cancer is the leading cause of death in industrialized countries, conventional anticancer medications are unlikely to increase patients' life expectancy and quality of life significantly. In recent years, there are significant advances in the development and applications of nanotechnology in cancer treatment. The superiority of nanostructured approaches is that they act more selectively than traditional agents. This progress led to the development of a novel field of cancer treatment known as nanomedicine. Various formulations based on nanocarriers, including lipids, polymers, liposomes, nanoparticles and dendrimers have opened new horizons in lung cancer therapy. The application and expansion of nano-agents lead to an exciting and challenging research era in pharmaceutical science, especially for the delivery of emerging anti-cancer agents. The objective of this review is to discuss the recent advances in three types of nanoparticle formulations for lung cancer treatments modalities, including liposomes, polymeric micelles, and dendrimers for efficient drug delivery. Afterward, we have summarized the promising clinical data on nanomaterials based therapeutic approaches in ongoing clinical studies.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
