---
pmid: '34405694'
doi: 10.1089/hum.2021.048
pmcid: ''
title: Antifibrotic Therapy Augments the Antitumor Effects of Vesicular Stomatitis
  Virus Via Reprogramming Tumor Microenvironment.
authors:
- Chen Yanwei
- Hu Shichuan
- Shu Yongheng
- Qi Zhongbing
- Zhang Bin
- Kuang Yueting
- Ma Jinhu
- Cheng Ping
journal: Human gene therapy
year: 2022
month: 3
volume: '33'
issue: 5-6
pages: 237-249
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 10
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Mice
- Neoplasms
- Oncolytic Virotherapy
- Oncolytic Viruses
- Tumor Microenvironment
- Vesicular Stomatitis
- Vesicular stomatitis Indiana virus
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- oncolytic-virus
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs:
- halofuginone
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Virus-based gene therapy research
diseases_annotated:
- Solid tumors
- Tumor
- cancer
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 6
icite_rcr: 0.47562905178661374
icite_percentile: 26.0
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Antifibrotic Therapy Augments the Antitumor Effects of Vesicular Stomatitis Virus Via Reprogramming Tumor Microenvironment.

## Abstract

Solid tumors are characterized by abundant extracellular matrix originating from cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs). High collagen content can trigger the collapse of vascular system in the tumor and form physical barrier that eventually impedes the penetration of drug particles and cytotoxic immune cells. Moreover, CAFs is able to promote the enrichment of tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) and differentiation of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) that work in concert to develop a highly immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment (TME). In this study, we investigated if halofuginone, an antifibrotic drug, can augment the therapeutic effects of oncolytic vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV). The results revealed that halofuginone significantly disrupts the collagen network in tumors and promotes the distribution of VSV and infiltration of CD8+ T cells (p < 0.0001). Combined treatment of VSV and halofuginone also modulates the immunosuppressive TME via deletion of TAM, MDSCs, and regulatory T cells (Tregs). Collectively, the combination therapy remarkably inhibits the tumor growth in multiple murine models and prolongs survival of mice. The results demonstrate the clinical potential of halofuginone in combination with oncolytic virus.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
