---
pmid: '34420448'
doi: 10.1080/02656736.2021.1899311
pmcid: ''
title: Oxford's clinical experience in the development of high intensity focused ultrasound
  therapy.
authors:
- Prachee Ishika
- Wu Feng
- Cranston David
journal: 'International journal of hyperthermia : the official journal of European
  Society for Hyperthermic Oncology, North American Hyperthermia Group'
year: 2021
month: 9
volume: '38'
issue: '2'
pages: 81-88
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/02656736.2021.1899311?needAccess=true
cited_by_count: 13
mesh_terms:
- Abdominal Neoplasms
- Extracorporeal Shockwave Therapy
- Female
- High-Intensity Focused Ultrasound Ablation
- Humans
- Male
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- hifu
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Ultrasound and Hyperthermia Applications
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- abdominal tumours
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 9
icite_rcr: 0.5114255060588399
icite_percentile: 27.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Oxford's clinical experience in the development of high intensity focused ultrasound therapy.

## Abstract

High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) capably bridges the disciplines of surgery, oncology and biomedical engineering science. It provides the precision associated with a surgical tool whilst remaining a truly non-invasive technique. Oxford has been a centre for both clinical and preclinical research in HIFU over the last twenty years. Research into this technology in the UK has a longer history, with much of the early research being carried out by Professor Gail ter Haar and her team at the Institute of Cancer Research at Sutton in Surrey. A broad range of potential applications have been explored extending from tissue ablation to novel drug delivery. This review presents Oxford's clinical studies and applications for the development of this non-invasive therapy. This includes treatment of solid abdominal tumours comprising those of the liver, kidney, uterus, pancreas, pelvis and prostate. It also briefly introduces preclinical and translational works that are currently being undertaken at the Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of Oxford. The safety, wide tolerability and effectiveness of this technology is comprehensively demonstrated across these studies. These results can facilitate the incorporation of HIFU as a key clinical management strategy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
