---
pmid: '34659907'
doi: ''
pmcid: PMC8493382
title: Tumor-treating fields as a proton beam-sensitizer for glioblastoma therapy.
authors:
- Lee Won Seok
- Seo Seung-Jun
- Chung Hye Kyung
- Park Jang Woo
- Kim Jong-Ki
- Kim Eun Ho
journal: American journal of cancer research
year: 2021
month: null
volume: '11'
issue: '9'
pages: 4582-4594
is_oa: false
oa_status: unknown
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 0
mesh_terms: []
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- ttfields
cancer_types:
- glioblastoma
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- AKT
- NF-kappaB
drugs:
- ROS
date_added: '2026-03-28'
diseases_annotated:
- GBM
- Tumor
- glioblastoma
- metastasis
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 14
icite_rcr: 0.8318556063753157
icite_percentile: 43.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Tumor-treating fields as a proton beam-sensitizer for glioblastoma therapy.

## Abstract

Few advances in GBM treatment have been made since the initiation of the Stupp trials in 2005. Experimental studies on immunotherapy drugs, molecular inhibitors, radiation dosage escalation and vascular growth factor blockers have all failed to provide satisfactory outcomes. TTFields therapy, on the other hand, have emerged as a viable substitute to therapies like radiation in GBM patients having a highly immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment. To enhance the biofunctional impacts, we explored the combination events with TTFields and proton treatment in this study. We conducted a cell viability test, a cell death detection evaluation, a ROS analysis, a three-dimensional (3D) culture system, and a migration assay. The combination of proton radiation and TTFields therapy laid a substantial anticancer impact on the F98 and U373 as compared to the consequences of either of these therapies used separately. The combination proton beam therapy used by TTFields was very successful in curbing GBM from migrating. GBM cell metastasis is restricted by TTFields combined proton by downregulating the MAPK, NF-κB, and PI3K/AKT indicating pathways, caused by reduced EMT marker expression. These findings furnish biological proof for the molecular grounds of TTFields in combination with proton used for GBM therapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
