---
pmid: '34655115'
doi: 10.1002/adma.202106838
pmcid: ''
title: 2D Piezoelectric Bi2 MoO6 Nanoribbons for GSH-Enhanced Sonodynamic Therapy.
authors:
- Dong Yushan
- Dong Shuming
- Liu Bin
- Yu Chenghao
- Liu Jing
- Yang Dan
- Yang Piaoping
- Lin Jun
journal: Advanced materials (Deerfield Beach, Fla.)
year: 2021
month: 12
volume: '33'
issue: '51'
pages: e2106838
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 323
mesh_terms:
- Glutathione
- Humans
- Molybdenum
- Animals
- Bismuth
- Reactive Oxygen Species
- Ultrasonic Therapy
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Mice
- Nanotubes, Carbon
- Oxides
- Neoplasms
- Polyethylene Glycols
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- sonodynamic
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs:
- BMO
- Bi2 MoO6
- GSH
- ROS
- glutathione
- oxygen
- poly(ethylene glycol)
- reactive oxygen species
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 203
icite_rcr: 11.526837446794222
icite_percentile: 98.3
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# 2D Piezoelectric Bi2 MoO6 Nanoribbons for GSH-Enhanced Sonodynamic Therapy.

## Abstract

Reducing the scavenging capacity of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and elevating ROS production are two primary goals of developing novel sonosensitizers for sonodynamic therapy (SDT). Hence, ultrathin 2D Bi2 MoO6 -poly(ethylene glycol) nanoribbons (BMO NRs) are designed as piezoelectric sonosensitizers for glutathione (GSH)-enhanced SDT. In cancer cells, BMO NRs can consume endogenous GSH to disrupt redox homeostasis, and the GSH-activated BMO NRs (GBMO) exhibit an oxygen-deficient structure, which can promote the separation of electron-hole pairs, thereby enhancing the efficiency of ROS production in SDT. The ultrathin GBMO NRs are piezoelectric, in which ultrasonic waves introduce mechanical strain to the nanoribbons, resulting in piezoelectric polarization and band tilting, thus accelerating toxic ROS production. The as-synthesized BMO NRs enable excellent computed tomography imaging of tumors and significant tumor suppression in vitro and in vivo. A piezoelectric Bi2 MoO6 sonosensitizer-mediated two-step enhancement SDT process, which is activated by endogenous GSH and amplified by exogenous ultrasound, is proposed. This process not only provides new options for improving SDT but also broadens the application of 2D piezoelectric materials as sonosensitizers in SDT.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
