---
pmid: '34752984'
doi: 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2021.112189
pmcid: ''
title: Pro-oxidant drug-loaded porphyrinic zirconium metal-organic-frameworks for
  cancer-specific sonodynamic therapy.
authors:
- Truong Hoang Quan
- Kim Miyeon
- Kim Byoung Choul
- Lee Chang Yeon
- Shim Min Suk
journal: Colloids and surfaces. B, Biointerfaces
year: 2022
month: 1
volume: '209'
issue: Pt 1
pages: '112189'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 27
mesh_terms:
- Metal-Organic Frameworks
- Neoplasms
- Oxidants
- Prodrugs
- Reactive Oxygen Species
- Zirconium
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- sonodynamic
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- MOFs
- PCN-222
- PEG
- PEG-PCN
- PL
- PL-PEG-PCN
- Polyethylene glycol
- ROS
- metal organic frameworks
- piperlongumine
- porphyrinic
- reactive oxygen species
- zirconium
- zirconium metal
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- breast cancer
- cancer
- cytotoxic
- sonotoxicity
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 17
icite_rcr: 1.4245189372507556
icite_percentile: 63.2
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Pro-oxidant drug-loaded porphyrinic zirconium metal-organic-frameworks for cancer-specific sonodynamic therapy.

## Abstract

Sonodynamic therapy, which utilizes ultrasound (US) to produce cytotoxic reactive oxygen species (ROS), can overcome the critical drawbacks of photodynamic therapy, such as limited tissue penetration depth. However, the development of sonosensitizers having superior sonodynamic effects and desirable biocompatibility remains a major challenge. In this study, nanoscale zirconium-based porphyrinic metal organic frameworks (MOFs) (PCN-222) were developed as safe and effective nanosonosensitizers. Polyethylene glycol (PEG)-coated PCN-222 (PEG-PCN) was loaded with a pro-oxidant drug, piperlongumine (PL), to enable tumor-specific chemo-photodynamic combination therapy. Both PEG-PCN and PL-incorporated PEG-PCN (PL-PEG-PCN) showed high colloidal stability in biological media. In addition, nanoscale PL-PEG-PCN was efficiently internalized by breast cancer cells, leading to substantially increased ROS generation under US exposure. The effective intracellular delivery of PL by PEG-PCN further elevated the level of intracellular ROS in breast cancer cells owing to the pro-oxidative activity of PL. Therefore, PL-PEG-PCN revealed significantly higher sonotoxicity than free PL and PEG-PCN. Owing to the cancer-specific apoptosis triggered by PL, PL-PEG-PCN showed cancer-selective cell death in breast cancer cells compared with normal fibroblast cells. This study demonstrates that pro-oxidant drug-loaded porphyrinic MOFs are biocompatible and effective sonosensitizers for cancer-targeted chemo-sonodynamic combination therapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
