---
pmid: '35238549'
doi: 10.1021/acsnano.1c09048
pmcid: ''
title: Nitric Oxide Induces Immunogenic Cell Death and Potentiates Cancer Immunotherapy.
authors:
- Jiang Wei
- Dong Wang
- Li Min
- Guo Zixuan
- Wang Qin
- Liu Yi
- Bi Yihui
- Zhou Han
- Wang Yucai
journal: ACS nano
year: 2022
month: 3
volume: '16'
issue: '3'
pages: 3881-3894
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 170
mesh_terms:
- Alarmins
- Animals
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Immunogenic Cell Death
- Immunotherapy
- Mice
- Neoplasms
- Nitric Oxide
- Polyesters
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- PD-1
drugs:
- Nitric Oxide
- immunogenic damage-associated molecular patterns
- nitric oxide
- polyesters
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- Tumor
- cancer
- metastasis
- mitochondrial dysfunction
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 120
icite_rcr: 8.23618475776641
icite_percentile: 96.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Nitric Oxide Induces Immunogenic Cell Death and Potentiates Cancer Immunotherapy.

## Abstract

Tumor cells undergoing immunogenic cell death (ICD) release immunogenic damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) to trigger a long-term protective antitumor response. ICD can be induced by certain pathogens, chemotherapeutics, and physical modalities. In this work, we demonstrate that a gaseous molecule, specifically nitric oxide (NO), can induce a potent ICD effect. NO exerts cytotoxic effects that are accompanied by the emission of DAMPs based on the endoplasmic reticulum stress and mitochondrial dysfunction pathways. Released DAMPs elicit immunological protection against a subsequent rechallenge of syngeneic tumor cells in immunocompetent mice. We prepare polynitrosated polyesters with high NO storage capacity through a facile polycondensation reaction followed by a postsynthetic modification. The polynitrosated polyesters-based NO nanogenerator (NanoNO) that enables efficient NO delivery and controlled NO release in tumors induces a sufficient ICD effect. In different immune-intact models of tumors, the NanoNO exhibits significant tumor growth suppression and increases the local dose of immunogenic signals and T cell infiltrations, ultimately prolonging survival. In addition, the NanoNO synergizes with the PD-1 blockade to prevent metastasis. We conclude not only that NO is a potent ICD inducer for cancer immunotherapy but also that it expands the range of ICD inducers into the field of gaseous molecules.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
