---
pmid: '35411245'
doi: ''
pmcid: PMC8984886
title: The combination of tumor treating fields and hyperthermia has synergistic therapeutic
  effects in glioblastoma cells by downregulating STAT3.
authors:
- Jo Yunhui
- Han Young In
- Lee Eunjun
- Seo Jaehyeon
- Oh Geon
- Sung Heehun
- Gi Yongha
- Kim Hyunwoo
- Park Sangmin
- Yoon Myonggeun
journal: American journal of cancer research
year: 2022
month: null
volume: '12'
issue: '3'
pages: 1423-1432
is_oa: false
oa_status: unknown
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 0
mesh_terms: []
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- ttfields
cancer_types:
- glioblastoma
evidence_level: preclinical-invitro
genes:
- PARP
- STAT3
- caspase-3
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
diseases_annotated:
- GBM
- Glioblastoma multiforme
- Hyperthermia
- brain tumor
- cancer
- cancers
- glioblastoma
- hyperthermia
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 13
icite_rcr: 1.13948156715431
icite_percentile: 55.1
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# The combination of tumor treating fields and hyperthermia has synergistic therapeutic effects in glioblastoma cells by downregulating STAT3.

## Abstract

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), the most common type of brain tumor, is a very aggressive and treatment-refractory cancer, with a 5-year survival rate of approximately 5%. Hyperthermia (HT) and tumor treating fields (TTF) therapy have been used to treat cancer, either alone or in combination with other treatment methods. Both treatments have been reported to increase the efficacy of other treatment techniques and to improve patient prognosis. The present study evaluated the therapeutic effects of combining HT and TTF on GBM cell lines. Cells were subjected to HT, TTF, HT+TTF, or neither treatment, followed by comparisons of cell proliferation, apoptosis, migration and invasiveness. Clonogenic assays showed that the two treatments had a synergistic effect. The levels of cleaved PARP and cleaved caspase-3 were higher and apoptosis was increased in cells treated with HT+TTF than in cells treated with HT or TTF alone. In addition, HT+TTF showed greater inhibition of GBM cell migration and invasiveness and greater downregulation of STAT3 than either HT or TTF alone. The stronger anticancer effect of HT+TTF suggested that this combination treatment can increase the survival rate of patients with difficult-to-treat cancers such as GBM.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
