---
pmid: '35676850'
doi: 10.2174/1389200223666220608144551
pmcid: ''
title: 'Nanotechnological Approaches for the Treatment of Triple-Negative Breast Cancer:
  A Comprehensive Review.'
authors:
- Guha Lahanya
- Bhat Ishfaq Ahmad
- Bashir Aasiya
- Rahman Jawad Ur
- Pottoo Faheem Hyder
journal: Current drug metabolism
year: 2022
month: null
volume: '23'
issue: '10'
pages: 781-799
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 8
mesh_terms:
- Female
- Humans
- Triple Negative Breast Neoplasms
- Nanotubes, Carbon
- Dendrimers
- Mastectomy
- Nanotechnology
- Lipids
pub_types:
- Review
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- crispr
- nanoparticle
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- carbon
- carbon nanotubes
- dendrimers
- lipid
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Computational Drug Discovery Methods
diseases_annotated:
- Breast cancer
- TNBC
- Triple-Negative Breast Cancer
- cancer
- cytotoxicity
- triple-negative breast cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 5
icite_rcr: 0.46863538278172806
icite_percentile: 25.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Nanotechnological Approaches for the Treatment of Triple-Negative Breast Cancer: A Comprehensive Review.

## Abstract

Breast cancer is the most prevalent cancer in women around the world, having a sudden spread nowadays because of the poor sedentary lifestyle of people. Comprising several subtypes, one of the most dangerous and aggressive ones is triple-negative breast cancer or TNBC. Even though conventional surgical approaches like single and double mastectomy and preventive chemotherapeutic approaches are available, they are not selective to cancer cells and are only for symptomatic treatment. A new branch called nanotechnology has emerged in the last few decades that offers various novel characteristics, such as size in nanometric scale, enhanced adherence to multiple targeting moieties, active and passive targeting, controlled release, and site-specific targeting. Among various nanotherapeutic approaches like dendrimers, lipid-structured nanocarriers, carbon nanotubes, etc., nanoparticle targeted therapeutics can be termed the best among all for their specific cytotoxicity to cancer cells and increased bioavailability to a target site. This review focuses on the types and molecular pathways involving TNBC, existing treatment strategies, various nanotechnological approaches like exosomes, carbon nanotubes, dendrimers, lipid, and carbon-based nanocarriers, and especially various nanoparticles (NPs) like polymeric, photodynamic, peptide conjugated, antibody-conjugated, metallic, inorganic, natural product capped, and CRISPR based nanoparticles already approved for treatment or are under clinical and pre-clinical trials for TNBC.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
