---
pmid: '35766330'
doi: 10.1039/d2nr00258b
pmcid: ''
title: Flexible CuS-embedded human serum albumin hollow nanocapsules with peroxidase-like
  activity for synergistic sonodynamic and photothermal cancer therapy.
authors:
- Wang Haijiao
- Tao Jun
- Xu Chaoli
- Tian Ying
- Lu Guangming
- Yang Bin
- Teng Zhaogang
journal: Nanoscale
year: 2022
month: 7
volume: '14'
issue: '27'
pages: 9702-9714
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 22
mesh_terms:
- Copper
- Humans
- Nanocapsules
- Nanoparticles
- Neoplasms
- Peroxidases
- Phototherapy
- Photothermal Therapy
- Serum Albumin, Human
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
- sonodynamic
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes:
- HSA
drugs:
- CuS
- TAPP
- tetra-(4-aminophenyl) porphyrin
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- breast tumor
- breast tumors
- cancer
- tumor
- tumor hypoxia
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 12
icite_rcr: 0.9107329730624701
icite_percentile: 46.8
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Flexible CuS-embedded human serum albumin hollow nanocapsules with peroxidase-like activity for synergistic sonodynamic and photothermal cancer therapy.

## Abstract

Nanoparticle flexibility is an important parameter in determining cell uptake and tumor accumulation, thus modulating therapeutic efficiency in cancer treatment. Herein, we successfully prepared CuS-embedded human serum albumin hollow nanocapsules (denoted CuS/HSA) by a hard-core-assisted layer-by-layer coating approach. This approach afforded CuS/HSA hollow nanocapsules with controllable shell thickness, tunable flexibility, uniform size (272.9 nm), a large hollow cavity, peroxidase-like activity, excellent photothermal conversion ability, and a high tetra-(4-aminophenyl) porphyrin (TAPP) loading capacity (27.3 wt%). The peroxidase-like activity of the CuS nanoparticles enabled them to overcome tumor hypoxia and augment the sonodynamic therapeutic (SDT) effects and photothermal conversion ability for photothermal therapy (PTT). In vitro experiments showed that the CuS/HSA-TAPP hollow nanocapsules efficiently induced cancer cell apoptosis under US irradiation and cancer cell ablation under laser irradiation, thus facilitating synergistic SDT and PTT. Importantly, the flexibility of the CuS/HSA hollow nanocapsules resulted in significantly enhanced cellular internalization and a longer mean residence time (131.3 h) than their solid counterparts (21.0 h). In a breast tumor model, the flexible CuS/HSA hollow nanocapsules exhibited high tumor accumulation of up to 27.1%. In vivo experiments demonstrated that the flexible CuS/HSA-TAPP hollow nanocapsules effectively eliminated breast tumors via the synergistic effect of SDT and PTT.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
