---
pmid: '36017627'
doi: 10.1089/ars.2021.0243
pmcid: ''
title: Novel Anticancer Strategy by Targeting the Gut Microbial Neurotransmitter Signaling
  to Overcome Immunotherapy Resistance.
authors:
- Leung Elaine Lai-Han
- Huang Jumin
- Zhang Junmin
- Zhang Juanhong
- Wang Meifang
- Zhu Yingjie
- Meng Zhiqiang
- Yu Haijie
- Neher Erwin
- Ma Lijuan
- Yao Xiaojun
journal: Antioxidants & redox signaling
year: 2023
month: 2
volume: '38'
issue: 4-6
pages: 298-315
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 6
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome
- Neoplasms
- Tumor Microenvironment
- Immunotherapy
- Neurotransmitter Agents
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer, Stress, Anesthesia, and Immune Response
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 8
icite_rcr: 0.7509456231480395
icite_percentile: 39.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Novel Anticancer Strategy by Targeting the Gut Microbial Neurotransmitter Signaling to Overcome Immunotherapy Resistance.

## Abstract

Significance: Microbial neurotransmitters, as potential targets for cancer therapy, are expected to provide a new perspective on the interaction between the gut microbiome and cancer immunotherapy. Recent Advances: Mounting data reveal that most neurotransmitters can be derived from gut microbiota. Furthermore, modulation of neurotransmitter signaling can limit tumor growth and enhance antitumor immunity. Critical Issues: Here, we first present the relationships between microbial neurotransmitters and cancer cells mediated by immune cells. Then, we discuss the microbial neurotransmitters recently associated with cancer immunotherapy. Notably, the review emphasizes that neurotransmitter signaling plays a substantial role in cancer immunotherapy as an emerging cancer treatment target by regulating targeted receptors and interfering with the tumor microenvironment. Future Directions: Future studies are required to uncover the antitumor mechanisms of neurotransmitter signaling to develop novel treatment strategies to overcome cancer immunotherapy resistance. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 38, 298-315.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
