---
pmid: '36092458'
doi: 10.1016/j.jobcr.2022.08.017
pmcid: PMC9450132
title: 'A long-term nutritional assessment of maxillary cancer patients undergoing
  prosthodontic rehabilitation after surgery: A longitudinal study.'
authors:
- Devi Elangbam Merina
- Gupta Chanchal
- Kochhar K P
- Koli Dheeraj Kumar
- Nanda Aditi
- Jain Veena
journal: Journal of oral biology and craniofacial research
year: 2022
month: null
volume: '12'
issue: '5'
pages: 702-708
is_oa: true
oa_status: green
oa_url: https://doaj.org/article/a309742f56174cf4ad118c5ff60956bf
cited_by_count: 5
mesh_terms: []
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms: []
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- PG
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Reconstructive Surgery and Microvascular Techniques
diseases_annotated:
- maxillary cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 3
icite_rcr: 0.3518066928889739
icite_percentile: 19.0
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# A long-term nutritional assessment of maxillary cancer patients undergoing prosthodontic rehabilitation after surgery: A longitudinal study.

## Abstract

**PURPOSE**: To evaluate the nutritional status (NS) of patients planned for maxillectomy and prosthodontic rehabilitation using three nutritional assessment methods.

**METHODS**: This longitudinal study enrolled 18 planned maxillectomy patients following the inclusion and exclusion criteria. NS was evaluated at five stages: before surgery (S0), 2 weeks after surgery (S1), 3 months after insertion of intermediate obturator (S2), just before fabrication of definitive obturator (S3), and 3 months after insertion of definitive obturator (S4) using two nutritional assessment tools i.e. Patient Generated -Subjective Global Assessment (PG-SGA) &Nutritional risk index (NRI); and body composition indicators i.e. body mass index (BMI), fat free mass (FFM), total body water (TBW), skeletal muscle mass (SMM) and skeletal muscle mass index (SMMI).To determine the changes in patient's nutritional status among different time points Repeated Measure ANOVA with Bonferroni post hoc adjustments was used.

**RESULTS**: Out of 18 patients, 12 were completed the study. NS of maxillectomy patients deteriorates significantly (p < .05) till stage S2. At S3, significant improvement occurred as compared to stage S2, but it remained significantly less than pre-surgical level. However, at stage S4, all parameters were statistically comparable to S0 (p > .05) except for PG-SGA (p < .001) and SMM (p = .044).

**CONCLUSION**: NS of maxillectomy patients worsen post surgically due to surgical morbidity and adverse effects of radiotherapy (RT) but improves with post-surgical healing, resolution of sequel of RT and improved oral function due to well-adapted obturator prosthesis.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
