---
pmid: '36208649'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2022.188808
pmcid: ''
title: 'Bioelectronic medicines: Therapeutic potential and advancements in next-generation
  cancer therapy.'
authors:
- Singh Arun Kumar
- Awasthi Rajendra
- Malviya Rishabha
journal: Biochimica et biophysica acta. Reviews on cancer
year: 2022
month: 11
volume: '1877'
issue: '6'
pages: '188808'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 23
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Cell Communication
- Signal Transduction
- Neoplasms
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- bioelectric
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Planarian Biology and Electrostimulation
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- cancer metastasis
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 7
icite_rcr: 0.6915034524197772
icite_percentile: 37.1
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Bioelectronic medicines: Therapeutic potential and advancements in next-generation cancer therapy.

## Abstract

Bioelectronic medicine has tremendous potential in biomedical sector including oncology research, research on biomechanical and chemical properties of cells and biomaterials, healing bone tissue using electromagnetic fields, and understanding bioelectrical properties of aging. Bioelectronic medicine uses electricity to alter the body's electrical communication systems in order to treat various illnesses. The bioelectric circuits produce an endogenous electric field and a resting voltage when the cells are functioning and communicating. Oncology research has gained considerable interest focused on the development of emerging bioelectric cancer medicines. Reprogrammable circuits that underlie cancer, regeneration, and embryogenesis are known as bioelectric signalling. It is possible to create new therapeutic options to slow the spread of cancer by taking advantage of the bioelectric properties of cancer cells. The treatment of cancer may benefit from bioelectronic medicine. We looked into the value of bioelectrical energy in the fight against disease. This communication also covered the methods for therapeutically controlling this fatal illness. It is crucial to identify or measure the electrical activity of body cells in order to control or modify bioelectricity and bring about changes in cell structure. Knowledge of the cell-to-cell ionic interaction, faradaic processes, and their function in developing cancer phenotypes may improve cancer treatment approaches. With new evidence supporting an electrical mechanism that promotes this phenomenon, the data may also help us understand cancer metastasis better.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
