---
pmid: '36200213'
doi: 10.2174/1574888X17666221004105330
pmcid: ''
title: 'A Bright Horizon of Intelligent Targeted-cancer Therapy: Nanoparticles Against
  Breast Cancer Stem Cells.'
authors:
- Vaez Ahmad
- Abbasi Milad
- Shabani Leili
- Azizipour Esmat
- Shafiee Mostafa
- Zare Mohammad Ali
- Rahbar Omid
- Azari Arezo
- Amani Ali Mohammad
- Golchin Ali
journal: Current stem cell research & therapy
year: 2023
month: null
volume: '18'
issue: '6'
pages: 787-799
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 10
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Female
- Breast Neoplasms
- Tissue Distribution
- Nanoparticles
- Neoplastic Stem Cells
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Graphene and Nanomaterials Applications
diseases_annotated:
- Breast cancer
- breast cancer
- breast cancers
- cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 6
icite_rcr: 0.7160646624776605
icite_percentile: 38.3
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# A Bright Horizon of Intelligent Targeted-cancer Therapy: Nanoparticles Against Breast Cancer Stem Cells.

## Abstract

Breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs) are heterogeneous tumor-initiating cell subgroups of breast cancers that possess some stem cell markers and are sustained after chemotherapy. Due to BCSCs being sufficient for tumor relapse, and given that the biological behaviors of BCSCs are so complex, it is critical to figure out exactly how they work, learn more about their cell biology, and discover biomarkers and strategies for explicitly targeting and destructing cancer stem cells. In order to accomplish innovative treatment for breast cancer, it is also essential to target BCSCs. Despite the vast quantities of BCSC target chemicals, their therapeutic implementation is limited due to off-target behavior and bioavailability issues. Targeted drug delivery systems based on nanoparticles have advantages for transporting anti-BCSC materials, especially to targeted locations. Hence, breast cancer therapy using a nanoparticle-based BCSCs targeting system is a promising strategy. Such targeted drug delivery systems can resolve the biodistribution obstacles of nanosystems. Throughout this paper, we highlight various strategies for targeting BCSCs utilizing nano-based systems. In conclusion, issues about the inadequate stability of nanoparticles and the possibility of loaded drug leakage during delivery systems have yet to be answered. More fundamental and applied research, and proper methods such as coating or surface modification are required.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
