---
pmid: '36206948'
doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2022.09.065
pmcid: ''
title: 'Glioma diagnosis and therapy: Current challenges and nanomaterial-based solutions.'
authors:
- Li Tianzhong
- Li Jingfeng
- Chen Zhi
- Zhang Shaohui
- Li Shunling
- Wageh S
- Al-Hartomy Omar A
- Al-Sehemi Abdullah G
- Xie Zhongjian
- Kankala Ranjith Kumar
- Zhang Han
journal: 'Journal of controlled release : official journal of the Controlled Release
  Society'
year: 2022
month: 12
volume: '352'
issue: ''
pages: 338-370
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 105
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Glioma
- Brain Neoplasms
- Nanomedicine
- Nanostructures
- Blood-Brain Barrier
- Tumor Microenvironment
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- nanoparticle
- ttfields
cancer_types:
- glioblastoma
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- Glioma
- brain tumors
- glioma
- hypoxia
- specific tumors
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 66
icite_rcr: 5.441411182079618
icite_percentile: 93.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Glioma diagnosis and therapy: Current challenges and nanomaterial-based solutions.

## Abstract

Glioma is often referred to as one of the most dreadful central nervous system (CNS)-specific tumors with rapidly-proliferating cancerous glial cells, accounting for nearly half of the brain tumors at an annual incidence rate of 30-80 per a million population. Although glioma treatment remains a significant challenge for researchers and clinicians, the rapid development of nanomedicine provides tremendous opportunities for long-term glioma therapy. However, several obstacles impede the development of novel therapeutics, such as the very tight blood-brain barrier (BBB), undesirable hypoxia, and complex tumor microenvironment (TME). Several efforts have been dedicated to exploring various nanoformulations for improving BBB permeation and precise tumor ablation to address these challenges. Initially, this article briefly introduces glioma classification and various pathogenic factors. Further, currently available therapeutic approaches are illustrated in detail, including traditional chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and surgical practices. Then, different innovative treatment strategies, such as tumor-treating fields, gene therapy, immunotherapy, and phototherapy, are emphasized. In conclusion, we summarize the article with interesting perspectives, providing suggestions for future glioma diagnosis and therapy improvement.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
