---
pmid: '36227024'
doi: 10.1002/ptr.7550
pmcid: ''
title: 'Targeting lncRNA/Wnt axis by flavonoids: A promising therapeutic approach
  for colorectal cancer.'
authors:
- Han Shuai
- Cao Yunyun
- Guo Tianyi
- Lin Qinlu
- Luo Feijun
journal: 'Phytotherapy research : PTR'
year: 2022
month: 11
volume: '36'
issue: '11'
pages: 4024-4040
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 15
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- RNA, Long Noncoding
- Flavonoids
- Colorectal Neoplasms
- beta Catenin
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
- Carcinogenesis
- Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms: []
cancer_types:
- colorectal
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- beta-Catenin
drugs:
- flavonoids
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer-related molecular mechanisms research
diseases_annotated:
- CRC
- carcinogenesis
- colorectal cancer
- metastasis
- toxicity
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 12
icite_rcr: 1.134320756282439
icite_percentile: 54.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Targeting lncRNA/Wnt axis by flavonoids: A promising therapeutic approach for colorectal cancer.

## Abstract

Despite the dramatic advances in our understanding of the etiology of colorectal cancer (CRC) in recent decades, effective therapeutic strategies are still urgently needed. Oncogenic mutations in the Wnt/β-Catenin pathway are hallmarks of CRC. Moreover, long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) as molecular managers are involved in the initiation, progression, and metastasis of CRC. Therefore, it is important to further explore the interaction between lncRNAs and Wnt/β-Catenin signaling pathway for targeted therapy of CRC. Natural phytochemicals have not toxicity and can target carcinogenesis-related pathways. Growing evidences suggest that flavonoids are inversely associated with CRC risk. These bioactive compounds could target carcinogenesis pathways of CRC and reduced the side effects of anti-cancer drugs. The review systematically summarized the progress of flavonoids targeting lncRNA/Wnt axis in the investigations of CRC, which will provide a promising therapeutic approach for CRC and develop nutrition-oriented preventive strategies for CRC based on epigenetic mechanisms. In the field, more epidemiological and clinical trials are required in the future to verify feasibility of targeting lncRNA/Wnt axis by flavonoids in the therapy and prevention of CRC.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
