---
pmid: '36228110'
doi: 10.1002/smtd.202201051
pmcid: ''
title: Holdase/Foldase Mimetic Nanochaperone Improves Antibody-Based Cancer Immunotherapy.
authors:
- Zhang Yongxin
- Fu Hao
- Chen Jiajing
- Xu Linlin
- An Yingli
- Ma Rujiang
- Zhu Chunlei
- Liu Yang
- Ma Feihe
- Shi Linqi
journal: Small methods
year: 2023
month: 5
volume: '7'
issue: '5'
pages: e2201051
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 10
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Antibodies, Monoclonal
- Immunotherapy
- Neoplasms
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs:
- R848
- resiquimod
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Monoclonal and Polyclonal Antibodies Research
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- cancer
- immunotoxicity
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 3
icite_rcr: 0.20504299686952412
icite_percentile: 10.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Holdase/Foldase Mimetic Nanochaperone Improves Antibody-Based Cancer Immunotherapy.

## Abstract

Despite unprecedented successes of antibody-based cancer immunotherapy, the serious side effects and rapid clearance following systemic administration remain big challenges to realize its full potential. At the same time, combination immunotherapy using multiple antibodies has shown particularly promising in cancer treatment. It is noticed that the working mechanisms of natural holdase and foldase chaperone are desirable to overcome the limitations of therapeutic antibodies. Holdase chaperone stabilizes unfolded client and prevents it from activation and degradation, while foldase chaperone assists unfolded client to its native state to function. Here a holdase/foldase mimetic nanochaperone (H/F-nChap) to co-delivery two types of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), αCD16 and αPDL1, and resiquimod (R848) is developed, which significantly improves cancer immunotherapy. The H/F-nChap presents holdase activity in blood and normal tissues that hides and protects mAbs from unnecessary targeted activation and degradation, thereby prolonging blood circulation and reducing immunotoxicity in vivo. Furthermore, H/F-nChap switches to foldase activity in the tumor microenvironment that exposes mAbs and releases R848 to enhance the engagement between NK cells and tumor cells and promote immune activation, respectively. The H/F-nChap represents a strategy for safe and spatiotemporal delivery of multiple mAbs, providing a promising platform for improved cancer immunotherapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
