---
pmid: '36309208'
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2022.10.018
pmcid: ''
title: Gut Microbiota Modulation of Efficacy and Toxicity of Cancer Chemotherapy and
  Immunotherapy.
authors:
- Chrysostomou Despoina
- Roberts Lauren A
- Marchesi Julian R
- Kinross James M
journal: Gastroenterology
year: 2023
month: 2
volume: '164'
issue: '2'
pages: 198-213
is_oa: true
oa_status: bronze
oa_url: http://www.gastrojournal.org/article/S0016508522011969/pdf
cited_by_count: 236
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome
- Immunotherapy
- Neoplasms
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Microbiota
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- microbiome
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- programmed cell death protein 1
drugs:
- 5-fluorouracil
- cyclophosphamide
- gemcitabine
- irinotecan
- methotrexate
- oxaliplatin
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Gut microbiota and health
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- Toxicity
- cancer
- toxicity
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 168
icite_rcr: 17.10636226321784
icite_percentile: 99.2
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.95
icite_enriched: true
---

# Gut Microbiota Modulation of Efficacy and Toxicity of Cancer Chemotherapy and Immunotherapy.

## Abstract

Accumulating evidence supports not only the functional role of the gut microbiome in cancer development and progression but also its role in defining the efficacy and toxicity of chemotherapeutic agents (5-fluorouracil, cyclophosphamide, irinotecan, oxaliplatin, gemcitabine, methotrexate) and immunotherapeutic compounds (anti-programmed death-ligand 1/anti-programmed cell death protein 1 and anti-cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated antigen 4). This evidence is supported in numerous in vitro, animal, and clinical studies that highlight the importance of microbial mechanisms in defining therapeutic responses. The microbiome therefore shapes oncologic outcomes and is now being leveraged for the development of novel personalized therapeutic approaches in cancer treatment. However, if the microbiome is to be successfully translated into next-generation oncologic treatments, a new multimodal model of the oncomicrobiome must be conceptualized that incorporates gut microbial cometabolism of pharmacologic agents into cancer care. The objective of this review is therefore to outline the current knowledge of oncologic pharmacomicrobiomics and to describe how the multiparametric functions of the gut microbiome influence treatment response across cancer types. The secondary objective is to propose innovative approaches for modulating the gut microbiome in clinical environments that improve therapy efficacy and diminish toxic effects derived from antineoplastic agents for patient benefit.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
