---
pmid: '36583572'
doi: 10.1021/acsnano.2c08687
pmcid: ''
title: Ag-Doped Metal-Organic Frameworks' Heterostructure for Sonodynamic Therapy
  of Deep-Seated Cancer and Bacterial Infection.
authors:
- Meng Xiangdan
- Sun Sirong
- Gong Chenchen
- Yang Junyan
- Yang Zhou
- Zhang Xueji
- Dong Haifeng
journal: ACS nano
year: 2022
month: 12
volume: ''
issue: ''
pages: ''
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 88
mesh_terms: []
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
- sonodynamic
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- Ag NPs
- Ag-Doped Metal-Organic Frameworks
- H2O
- MIL
- MIL@Ag
- MIL@Ag-PEG
- MOF
- MOFs
- Metal-organic frameworks
- O2
- O2-
- Ti
- hydroxyl radicals
- metal
- reactive oxygen species
- silver
- superoxide radicals
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- Bacterial Infection
- Deep-Seated Cancer
- bacterial infection
- deep-seated cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 50
icite_rcr: 4.077615554369195
icite_percentile: 90.4
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Ag-Doped Metal-Organic Frameworks' Heterostructure for Sonodynamic Therapy of Deep-Seated Cancer and Bacterial Infection.

## Abstract

Metal-organic frameworks (MOF) have attracted great potential in sonodynamic therapy (SDT) owing to large sonosensitizers' loading and fast reactive oxygen species' (ROS) diffusion; however, the low ligand-to-metal charge transfer efficiency sharply impairs the SDT effect. Herein, we report the design of MIL@Ag heterostructures with high electron-hole pairs separation efficiency and enhanced diverse ROS generation ability for deep-seated cancer treatment and bacterial infection. The MIL@Ag heterostructure is composed of Ti-based MOFs (named MIL), on which are in situ assembled silver nanoparticles (Ag NPs). The electrochemical experiments and density functional theory calculations verify that the introduction of Ag NPs can significantly improve the electron transfer efficiency and O2 adsorption capacity of MIL. Under ultrasound irradiation, the doped Ag NPs can trap the activated electrons from MIL to reduce surrounding O2 and produce superoxide radicals (•O2-), while the activated holes enable oxidizing H2O to produce hydroxyl radicals (•OH). Thus, they efficiently improve the therapeutic efficiency of SDT. MIL@Ag-PEG-mediated SDT implements A549 cancer cells' killing under a tissue barrier of 2 cm and eradicates the bacterial infection of Staphylococcus aureus, thus promoting wound healing. Therefore, MIL@Ag-PEG provides a promising strategy for augmenting SDT performance by rational heterostructure design of sonosensitizers.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
