---
pmid: '36609838'
doi: 10.1002/smtd.202201381
pmcid: ''
title: Cancer Immunotherapy Elicited by Immunogenic Cell Death Based on Smart Nanomaterials.
authors:
- Yang Mengyao
- Zhang Cheng
- Wang Rui
- Wu Xiaofeng
- Li Haidong
- Yoon Juyoung
journal: Small methods
year: 2023
month: 5
volume: '7'
issue: '5'
pages: e2201381
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 35
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Immunogenic Cell Death
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Neoplasms
- Immunotherapy
- Nanostructures
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- reactive oxygen species
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- Death
- ICD
- cancer
- death
- metastases
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 24
icite_rcr: 2.4100507708180636
icite_percentile: 79.7
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Cancer Immunotherapy Elicited by Immunogenic Cell Death Based on Smart Nanomaterials.

## Abstract

Cancer immunotherapy has been a revolutionary cancer treatment modality because it can not only eliminate primary tumors but also prevent metastases and recurrent tumors. Immunogenic cell death (ICD) induced by various treatment modalities, including chemotherapy, phototherapy, and radiotherapy, converts dead cancer cells into therapeutic vaccines, eliciting a systemic antigen-specific antitumor. However, the outcome effect of cancer immunotherapy induced by ICD has been limited due to the low accumulation efficiency of ICD inducers in the tumor site and concomitant damage to normal tissues. The boom in smart nanomaterials is conducive to overcoming these hurdles owing to their virtues of good stability, targeted lesion site, high bioavailability, on-demand release, and good biocompatibility. Herein, the design of targeted nanomaterials, various ICD inducers, and the applications of nanomaterials responsive to different stimuli, including pH, enzymes, reactive oxygen species, or dual responses are summarized. Furthermore, the prospect and challenges are briefly outlined to provide reference and inspiration for designing novel smart nanomaterials for immunotherapy induced by ICD.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
