---
pmid: '36706198'
doi: ''
pmcid: ''
title: Methylphenidate Reversal of Executive Dysfunction in a Patient with Bi-Frontal
  Lobe Glioblastoma.
authors:
- McGillion-Moore Jake
- Sampath Prakash
- Wong Eric T
journal: Rhode Island medical journal (2013)
year: 2023
month: 2
volume: '106'
issue: '1'
pages: 7-10
is_oa: false
oa_status: unknown
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 0
mesh_terms:
- Male
- Humans
- Aged
- Glioblastoma
- Temozolomide
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Frontal Lobe
- Dexamethasone
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- ttfields
cancer_types:
- glioblastoma
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- Methylphenidate
- bevacizumab
- dexamethasone
- methylphenidate
- temozolomide
date_added: '2026-03-28'
diseases_annotated:
- Bi-Frontal Lobe Glioblastoma
- Executive Dysfunction
- Tumor
- cerebral edema
- executive dysfunction
- glioblastoma
- neuro-cognitive deficits
- neuro-cognitive slowing
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 0
icite_rcr: 0.0
icite_percentile: 0.0
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Methylphenidate Reversal of Executive Dysfunction in a Patient with Bi-Frontal Lobe Glioblastoma.

## Abstract

An elderly man with advanced glioblastoma developed neuro-cognitive deficits that were reversed by methylphenidate. After tumor resection from the right frontal lobe, he received cranial irradiation, temozolomide and Tumor Treating Fields (TTFields). MRI afterwards showed enhancements near the resection cavity and the contralateral frontal lobe. The patient experienced mild executive dysfunction that was not limiting his activities. Adjuvant temozolomide was started along with TTFields. After 2 cycles, his brain MRI showed stable disease, but he exhibited significant executive dysfunction. Methylphenidate improved his neuro-cognitive slowing in cycles 3 and 4. His disease eventually progressed during the 5th cycle, and he experienced a marked decline in activities. Repeat head MRI revealed tumor progression and cerebral edema. Treatments were discontinued while dexamethasone improved his neurological functions and bevacizumab biosimilar was later added. This case demonstrates the activity of methylphenidate for managing executive dysfunction in patients with glioblastoma while minimizing the use of dexamethasone.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
