---
pmid: '36773871'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2023.123634
pmcid: ''
title: Levan nanoparticles with intrinsic CD44-targeting ability for tumor-targeted
  drug delivery.
authors:
- Lee Jin Sil
- Park Eunyoung
- Oh Hyeryeon
- Choi Won Il
- Koo Heebeom
journal: International journal of biological macromolecules
year: 2023
month: 4
volume: '234'
issue: ''
pages: '123634'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 19
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Mice
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Drug Delivery Systems
- Fructans
- Nanoparticles
- Neoplasms
- Paclitaxel
- Reproducibility of Results
- Hyaluronan Receptors
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes:
- CD44
drugs:
- LevNP
- Levan
- PTX
- levan
- paclitaxel
- polysaccharide
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Microbial Metabolites in Food Biotechnology
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 13
icite_rcr: 2.252962401960985
icite_percentile: 77.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Levan nanoparticles with intrinsic CD44-targeting ability for tumor-targeted drug delivery.

## Abstract

Existing anticancer therapeutics exhibit short half-lives, non-specificity, and severe side effects. To address this, active-targeting nanoparticles have been developed; however, the complex fabrication procedures, scale-up, and low reproducibility delay FDA approval, particularly for functionalized nanoparticles. We developed levan nanoparticles via simple one-pot nanoprecipitation for specific anticancer drug delivery. Levan is a plant polysaccharide which has a binding affinity to CD44 receptors and amphiphilicity. The nanoparticles are self-assembled and enable active-targeting without chemical modifications. The paclitaxel-loaded levan nanoparticles (PTX@LevNP) demonstrated a sustained PTX release and long-term stability. The LevNP can bind CD44 receptors on cancer cells, and PTX@LevNP showed enhanced anticancer activity in CD44-positive cells (SCC7 cells). In SCC7 tumor-bearing mice, the accumulation of LevNP in tumor tissue was 3.7 times higher than that of the free-dye, resulting in improved anticancer efficacy of PTX@LevNP. This new strategy using levan can produce nanoparticles for effective cancer treatment without complex fabrication procedures.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
