---
pmid: '36792048'
doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2023.02.012
pmcid: ''
title: NIR-II light evokes DNA cross-linking for chemotherapy and immunogenic cell
  death.
authors:
- Huang Yun
- Wei Dengshuai
- Wang Bin
- Tang Dongsheng
- Cheng Ailan
- Xiao Shengjun
- Yu Yingjie
- Huang Weiguo
journal: Acta biomaterialia
year: 2023
month: 4
volume: '160'
issue: ''
pages: 198-210
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 47
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Oxaliplatin
- Immunogenic Cell Death
- Borates
- Neoplasms
- Nanoparticles
- Immunotherapy
- DNA
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Pyrans
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- nanoparticle
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: preclinical-invitro
genes: []
drugs:
- IR1061
- OXA
- Pt
- Pt(IV)-C16
- oxaliplatin
- platinum (IV)
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- breast cancer
- cancer
- death
- hyperthermia
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 29
icite_rcr: 2.914033127341614
icite_percentile: 84.3
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# NIR-II light evokes DNA cross-linking for chemotherapy and immunogenic cell death.

## Abstract

As a DNA damaging agent, oxaliplatin (OXA) can induce immunogenic cell death (ICD) in tumors to activate the immune system. However, the DNA damage induced by OXA is limited and the ICD effect is not strong enough to enhance anti-tumor efficacy. Here, we propose a strategy to maximize the ICD effect of OXA through the mild hyperthermia generated by nanoparticles with a platinum (IV) prodrug of OXA (Pt(IV)-C16) and a near-infrared-II (NIR-II) photothermal agent IR1061 upon the irradiation of NIR-II light. The mild hyperthermia (43ʡC) holds advantages in two aspects: 1) increase the Pt-DNA cross-linking, leading to enhanced DNA damage and apoptosis; 2) induce stronger ICD effects for cancer immunotherapy. We demonstrated that, compared with OXA and photothermal therapy of IR1061 alone, these nanoparticles under NIR-II light irradiation can significantly improve the anti-cancer efficacy against triple-negative breast cancer 4T1 tumor. This new strategy provides an effective way to improve the therapeutic outcome of OXA. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE: OXA could induce immunogenic cell death (ICD) via stimulating immune responses by increasing tumor cell stress and death, which triggers tumor-specific immune responses to achieve immunotherapy. However, due to the insufficient Pt-DNA crosslinks, the ICD effect triggered by OXA cannot induce robust immune response. Mild hyperthermia has great potential to maximize the therapeutic outcome of oxaliplatin by increasing the Pt-DNA cross-linking to augment the immunoresponse for enhanced cancer immunotherapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
