---
pmid: '36811166'
doi: 10.1002/smtd.202201401
pmcid: ''
title: Radiation-Induced Immunogenic Cell Death for Cancer Radioimmunotherapy.
authors:
- Liu Teng
- Pei Pei
- Shen Wenhao
- Hu Lin
- Yang Kai
journal: Small methods
year: 2023
month: 5
volume: '7'
issue: '5'
pages: e2201401
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 85
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Radioimmunotherapy
- Immunogenic Cell Death
- Immunotherapy
- Neoplasms
- T-Lymphocytes, Cytotoxic
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer Immunotherapy and Biomarkers
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- Immunogenic Cell Death
- cancer
- cytokine
- immunogenic cell death
- tumor
- tumoral
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 68
icite_rcr: 6.326791542124466
icite_percentile: 95.2
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Radiation-Induced Immunogenic Cell Death for Cancer Radioimmunotherapy.

## Abstract

In cancer treatment, traditional radiotherapy (RT) is routinely conducted in local tumors and limited by radioresistance, while recently emerged immunotherapy is confronted with low response rate, high cost, and cytokine release syndrome. Logically, the combination of the two therapeutic modalities into radioimmunotherapy is promising to complement with each other for systemic elimination of cancer cells with high specificity, efficiency, and safety. Especially, RT-induced immunogenic cell death (ICD) plays an imperative role in radioimmunotherapy to evoke systemic immune response against cancer, including elevating the immunity of tumor antigens, recruiting and activating antigen-presenting cells, and priming cytotoxic T lymphocytes for tumoral infiltration and cancer cell eradication. This review first retrospects the origin and concept of ICD, summarizes the major damage-associated molecular patterns and signaling pathways, and highlights the characteristics of RT-induced ICD. Subsequently, therapeutic strategies enhancing RT-induced ICD for radioimmunotherapy are reviewed from the perspectives of enhancing RT itself, combination with other treatments, and stimulating the holistic immune system. On the basis of these published research and underlying mechanism, this work attempts to forecast possible directions for RT-induced ICD enhancement to promote clinical applications.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
