---
pmid: '36840906'
doi: 10.1007/s13346-023-01308-9
pmcid: ''
title: 'Targeting fibroblast activation protein (FAP): advances in CAR-T cell, antibody,
  and vaccine in cancer immunotherapy.'
authors:
- Shahvali Sedigheh
- Rahiman Niloufar
- Jaafari Mahmoud Reza
- Arabi Leila
journal: Drug delivery and translational research
year: 2023
month: 7
volume: '13'
issue: '7'
pages: 2041-2056
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 82
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- T-Lymphocytes
- Receptors, Chimeric Antigen
- Membrane Proteins
- Serine Endopeptidases
- Neoplasms
- Immunotherapy
- Antibodies
- Fibroblasts
- Vaccines
pub_types:
- Review
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- car-t
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- CAR
- FAP
- Fibroblast activation protein
- fibroblast activation protein
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Peptidase Inhibition and Analysis
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- cancer-
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 72
icite_rcr: 7.510563622669927
icite_percentile: 96.4
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Targeting fibroblast activation protein (FAP): advances in CAR-T cell, antibody, and vaccine in cancer immunotherapy.

## Abstract

Fibroblast activation protein (FAP) is a serine protease with dual enzymatic activities overexpressed in cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) in several tumor types, while its expression in healthy adult tissues is scarce. FAP overexpression on CAFs is associated with poor prognosis and plays an important role in tumor development, progression, and invasion. Therefore, FAP is considered a robust therapeutic target for cancer therapy. Here, we try to review and highlight the recent advances in immunotherapies for FAP targeting including the anti-FAP antibodies and immunoconjugates, FAP chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-T cell, and various FAP vaccines in a preclinical and clinical setting. Subsequently, a discussion on the challenges and prospects associated with the development and translation of effective and safe therapies for targeting and depletion of FAP is provided. We proposed that new CAR-T cell engineering strategies and nanotechnology-based systems as well as advanced functional biomaterials can be used to improve the efficiency and safety of CAR-T cells and vaccines against FAP for more personalized immunotherapy. This review emphasizes the immune targeting of FAP as an emerging stromal candidate and one of the crucial elements in immunotherapy and shows the potential for improvement of current cancer therapy. A summary of different immunotherapy approaches to target fibroblast activation protein (FAP) for cancer therapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
