---
pmid: '36854723'
doi: 10.1038/s41388-023-02646-1
pmcid: ''
title: Combinatorial targeting of immune checkpoints and epigenetic regulators for
  hepatocellular carcinoma therapy.
authors:
- Akce Mehmet
- El-Rayes Bassel F
- Wajapeyee Narendra
journal: Oncogene
year: 2023
month: 3
volume: '42'
issue: '14'
pages: 1051-1057
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 21
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Carcinoma, Hepatocellular
- Liver Neoplasms
- Chromatin
- Epigenesis, Genetic
- Tumor Microenvironment
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types:
- liver
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer Immunotherapy and Biomarkers
diseases_annotated:
- HCC
- HCC tumor
- Hepatocellular carcinoma
- cancer
- cancers
- hepatocellular carcinoma
- immune-cold
- liver tumor
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 17
icite_rcr: 1.387987157747811
icite_percentile: 62.3
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Combinatorial targeting of immune checkpoints and epigenetic regulators for hepatocellular carcinoma therapy.

## Abstract

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the second leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide. The five-year survival rate of patients with unresectable HCC is about 12%. The liver tumor microenvironment (TME) is immune tolerant and heavily infiltrated with immunosuppressive cells. Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), in some cases, can reverse tumor cell immune evasion and enhance antitumor immunity. Rapidly evolving ICIs have expanded systemic treatment options in advanced HCC; however, single-agent ICIs achieve a limited 15-20% objective response rate in advanced HCC. Therefore, other combinatorial approaches that amplify the efficacy of ICIs or suppress other tumor-promoting pathways may enhance clinical outcomes. Epigenetic alterations (e.g., changes in chromatin states and non-genetic DNA modifications) have been shown to drive HCC tumor growth and progression as well as their response to ICIs. Recent studies have combined ICIs and epigenetic inhibitors in preclinical and clinical settings to contain several cancers, including HCC. In this review, we outline current ICI treatments for HCC, the mechanism behind their successes and failures, and how ICIs can be combined with distinct epigenetic inhibitors to increase the durability of ICIs and potentially treat "immune-cold" HCC.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
