---
pmid: '36892021'
doi: 10.2174/1389450124666230308154551
pmcid: ''
title: 'Unveiling Role of MicroRNAs in Metastasizing Triple Negative Breast Cancer:
  From Therapeutics to Delivery.'
authors:
- Balkrishna Acharya
- Mittal Rashmi
- Arya Vedpriya
journal: Current drug targets
year: 2023
month: null
volume: '24'
issue: '6'
pages: 509-520
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 3
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- MicroRNAs
- Triple Negative Breast Neoplasms
- Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition
- Drug Delivery Systems
pub_types:
- Review
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- silica
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: MicroRNA in disease regulation
diseases_annotated:
- Breast Cancer
- TNBC
- Triple negative breast cancers
- cancer
- metastasis
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 4
icite_rcr: 0.6227143892978427
icite_percentile: 33.7
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Unveiling Role of MicroRNAs in Metastasizing Triple Negative Breast Cancer: From Therapeutics to Delivery.

## Abstract

Triple negative breast cancers are malignant, heterogeneous tumors with high histological grades, increased reoccurrence, and cancer-related death rates. TNBC metastasis to the brain, lungs, liver, and lymph nodes is a complex process regulated by epithelial to mesenchymal transition, intravasation, extravasation, stem cell niche, and migration. Aberrant expression of miRNAs, also known as a transcriptional regulators of genes, may function as oncogenes or tumor suppressors. In this review, we systematically elucidated the biogenesis and tumor suppressor role of miRNA in targeting distant metastasis of TNBC cells and the above-mentioned underlying mechanisms involved in complicating the disease. Apart from their therapeutic implications, the emerging roles of miRNAs as prognostic markers have also been discussed. To overcome delivery bottlenecks, RNA nanoparticles, nano-diamonds, exosomes, and mesoporous silica nanoparticle-mediated delivery of miRNAs have been contemplated. Altogether, the present review article uncovers the potential role of miRNA in antagonizing distant metastasis of TNBC cells, and highlights their clinical significance as prognostic markers and possible drug delivery strategies to enhance the likely outcome of miRNA-based therapy against the disease.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
