---
pmid: '36890780'
doi: 10.1002/smll.202206211
pmcid: ''
title: Polysaccharide-Based Stimulus-Responsive Nanomedicines for Combination Cancer
  Immunotherapy.
authors:
- Li Qiuxia
- Liu Xing
- Yan Chunmei
- Zhao Bolin
- Zhao Yuxin
- Yang Lu
- Shi Mingyi
- Yu Hua
- Li Xiaofang
- Luo Kaipei
journal: Small (Weinheim an der Bergstrasse, Germany)
year: 2023
month: 6
volume: '19'
issue: '23'
pages: e2206211
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdfdirect/10.1002/smll.202206211
cited_by_count: 55
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Nanomedicine
- Neoplasms
- Drug Delivery Systems
- Immunotherapy
- Tumor Microenvironment
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- nanoparticle
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- Polysaccharide
- Polysaccharides
- polysaccharide
- polysaccharides
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 40
icite_rcr: 5.855456871377754
icite_percentile: 94.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Polysaccharide-Based Stimulus-Responsive Nanomedicines for Combination Cancer Immunotherapy.

## Abstract

Cancer immunotherapy is a promising antitumor approach, whereas nontherapeutic side effects, tumor microenvironment (TME) intricacy, and low tumor immunogenicity limit its therapeutic efficacy. In recent years, combination immunotherapy with other therapies has been proven to considerably increase antitumor efficacy. However, achieving codelivery of the drugs to the tumor site remains a major challenge. Stimulus-responsive nanodelivery systems show controlled drug delivery and precise drug release. Polysaccharides, a family of potential biomaterials, are widely used in the development of stimulus-responsive nanomedicines due to their unique physicochemical properties, biocompatibility, and modifiability. Here, the antitumor activity of polysaccharides and several combined immunotherapy strategies (e.g., immunotherapy combined with chemotherapy, photodynamic therapy, or photothermal therapy) are summarized. More importantly, the recent progress of polysaccharide-based stimulus-responsive nanomedicines for combination cancer immunotherapy is discussed, with the focus on construction of nanomedicine, targeted delivery, drug release, and enhanced antitumor effects. Finally, the limitations and application prospects of this new field are discussed.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
