---
pmid: '36919311'
doi: 10.1002/smll.202300327
pmcid: ''
title: Enhanced Sonodynamic Cancer Therapy through Iron-Doping and Oxygen-Vacancy
  Engineering of Piezoelectric Bismuth Tungstate Nanosheets.
authors:
- Ding Yiming
- Zhao Yunchao
- Yao Shuncheng
- Wang Shaobo
- Wan Xingyi
- Hu Quanhong
- Li Linlin
journal: Small (Weinheim an der Bergstrasse, Germany)
year: 2023
month: 6
volume: '19'
issue: '24'
pages: e2300327
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 58
mesh_terms:
- Mice
- Animals
- Oxygen
- Bismuth
- Ultrasonic Therapy
- Iron
- Reactive Oxygen Species
- Neoplasms
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Tumor Microenvironment
- Tungsten Compounds
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- sonodynamic
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs:
- BWO-Fe
- Bismuth Tungstate
- Fe
- H2 O2
- Iron
- Oxygen
- bismuth tungstate
- hydrogen peroxide
- hydroxyl radicals
- iron
- metal
- oxygen
- reactive oxygen species
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- breast cancer
- cancer
- cytotoxicity
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 35
icite_rcr: 3.8512798562088504
icite_percentile: 89.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Enhanced Sonodynamic Cancer Therapy through Iron-Doping and Oxygen-Vacancy Engineering of Piezoelectric Bismuth Tungstate Nanosheets.

## Abstract

Sonodynamic therapy (SDT) is regarded as a new-rising strategy for cancer treatment with low invasiveness and high tissue penetration, but the scarcity of high-efficiency sonosensitizers has seriously hindered its application. Herein, the iron-doped and oxygen-deficient bismuth tungstate nanosheets (BWO-Fe NSs) with piezotronic effect are synthesized for enhanced SDT. Due to the existence of oxygen defects introduced through Fe doping, the bandgap of BWO-Fe is significantly narrowed so that BWO-Fe can be more easily activated by exogenous ultrasound (US). The oxygen defects acting as the electron traps inhibit the recombination of US-induced electrons and holes. More importantly, the dynamically renewed piezoelectric potential facilitates the migration of electrons and holes to opposite side and causes energy band bending, which further promotes the production of reactive oxygen species. Furthermore, Fe doping endows BWO-Fe with Fenton reactivity, which converts hydrogen peroxide (H2 O2 ) in tumor microenvironment into hydroxyl radicals (•OH), thereby amplifying the cellular oxidative damage and enhancing SDT. Both in vitro and in vivo experiments illustrate their high cytotoxicity and tumor suppression rate against refractory breast cancer in mice. This work may provide an alternative strategy to develop oxygen-deficient piezoelectric sonosensitizers for enhanced SDT via doping metal ions.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
