---
pmid: '36933381'
doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2023.114526
pmcid: ''
title: Metabolic reprogramming and interventions in endometrial carcinoma.
authors:
- Li Jiajia
- Yang Hongmei
- Zhang Lingyi
- Zhang Songling
- Dai Yun
journal: Biomedicine & pharmacotherapy = Biomedecine & pharmacotherapie
year: 2023
month: 5
volume: '161'
issue: ''
pages: '114526'
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2023.114526
cited_by_count: 46
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Female
- Energy Metabolism
- Glycolysis
- Oxidative Phosphorylation
- Citric Acid Cycle
- Endometrial Neoplasms
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- metabolic-targeting
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- metformin
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer, Hypoxia, and Metabolism
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- EC
- MetS
- cancer
- dyslipidemia
- endometrial carcinoma
- hyperglycemia
- hypertension
- metabolic syndromes
- metastasis
- obesity
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 42
icite_rcr: 4.967026564739399
icite_percentile: 92.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Metabolic reprogramming and interventions in endometrial carcinoma.

## Abstract

Cancer cells are usually featured by metabolic adaptations that facilitate their growth, invasion, and metastasis. Thus, reprogramming of intracellular energy metabolism is currently one of the hotspots in the field of cancer research. Whereas aerobic glycolysis (known as the Warburg effect) has long been considered a dominant form of energy metabolism in cancer cells, emerging evidence indicates that other metabolic forms, especially oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), may play a critical role at least in some types of cancer. Of note, women with metabolic syndromes (MetS), including obesity, hyperglycemia, dyslipidemia, and hypertension, have an increased risk of developing endometrial carcinoma (EC), suggesting a close link between metabolism and EC. Interestingly, the metabolic preferences vary among EC cell types, particularly cancer stem cells and chemotherapy-resistant cells. Currently, it is commonly accepted that glycolysis is the main energy provider in EC cells, while OXPHOS is reduced or impaired. Moreover, agents specifically targeting the glycolysis and/or OXPHOS pathways can inhibit tumor cell growth and promote chemosensitization. For example, metformin and weight control not only reduce the incidence of EC but also improve the prognosis of EC patients. In this review, we comprehensively overview the current in-depth understanding of the relationship between metabolism and EC and provide up-to-date insights into the development of novel therapies targeting energy metabolism for auxiliary treatment in combination with chemotherapy for EC, especially those resistant to conventional chemotherapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
