---
pmid: '37004328'
doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2023.114621
pmcid: ''
title: Reinstating immunogenicity using bispecific anti-checkpoint/agent inhibitors.
authors:
- Mortezaee Keywan
- Majidpoor Jamal
journal: Biomedicine & pharmacotherapy = Biomedecine & pharmacotherapie
year: 2023
month: 6
volume: '162'
issue: ''
pages: '114621'
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2023.114621
cited_by_count: 10
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Antibodies, Bispecific
- Neoplasms
- Antibodies, Monoclonal
- Immunotherapy
- Tumor Microenvironment
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- CTLA-4
- PD-1
- PD-L1
- cytotoxic T lymphocyte associated antigen-4
- programmed death-1
- programmed death-ligand 1
drugs:
- checkpoint inhibitors
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer Immunotherapy and Biomarkers
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- cancers
- tumor
- tumor immune
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 8
icite_rcr: 0.78524354137569
icite_percentile: 41.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Reinstating immunogenicity using bispecific anti-checkpoint/agent inhibitors.

## Abstract

Immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) resistance demands for acquisition of novel strategies in order to broaden the therapeutic repertoire of advanced cancers. Bispecific antibodies can be utilized as an emerging therapeutic paradigm and a step forward in cancer immunotherapy. Synchronous inhibition of programmed death-1 (PD-1), programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) or cytotoxic T lymphocyte associated antigen-4 (CTLA-4), or with other agents can expand antibody selectivity and improve therapeutic window through tightening cell-to-cell bridge (a process called immunological synapse) within tumor immune microenvironment (TIME). There is evidence of higher potency of this co-targeting approach over combined single-agent monoclonal antibodies in reinvigorating anti-tumor immune responses, retarding tumor growth, and improving patient survival. In fact, immunological synapses formed by interactions of such bispecific agents with TIME cells directly mediate cytotoxicity against tumor cells, and durable anti-tumor immune responses are predictable after application of such agents. Besides, lower adverse events are reported for bispecific antibodies compared with individual checkpoint inhibitors. These are all indicative of the importance of exploiting novel bispecific approach as a replacement for conventional combo checkpoint inhibitor therapy particularly for tumors with immunosuppressive or cold immunity. Study in this area is still continued, and in the future more will be known about the importance of this bispecific approach in cancer immunotherapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
