---
pmid: '37052212'
doi: 10.1021/acsami.3c00494
pmcid: ''
title: Spleen-Targeted mRNA Delivery by Amphiphilic Carbon Dots for Tumor Immunotherapy.
authors:
- Chen Ping
- He Xi
- Hu Yue
- Tian Xiao-Li
- Yu Xiao-Qi
- Zhang Ji
journal: ACS applied materials & interfaces
year: 2023
month: 4
volume: '15'
issue: '16'
pages: 19937-19950
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 53
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Mice
- Spleen
- Dendritic Cells
- Carbon
- RNA, Messenger
- Immunotherapy
- Neoplasms
- Mice, Inbred C57BL
- Cancer Vaccines
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- mRNA-vaccine
- nanoparticle
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs:
- ACDs
- Carbon Dots
- carbon dots
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Advanced biosensing and bioanalysis techniques
diseases_annotated:
- Tumor
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 29
icite_rcr: 3.360191299872949
icite_percentile: 87.1
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Spleen-Targeted mRNA Delivery by Amphiphilic Carbon Dots for Tumor Immunotherapy.

## Abstract

In recent years, the application of mRNA vaccine-based tumor immunotherapy invigorated anti-tumor therapy. However, the low efficiency of mRNA delivery and the lack of targeting ability in vivo are the major obstacles to achieving highly efficient immunotherapy. In this work, we report a chemical library of amphiphilic carbon dots (ACDs) and the synthesized ACDs were applied to mRNA delivery, bio-imaging, and tumor immunotherapy. The ACDs can smoothly bind with mRNA to form ACDs@mRNA nanocomplexes, and the fluorescent properties of the ACDs afforded the nanoparticles with bio-imaging ability. By screening of the ACDs, O12-Tta-CDs were found to have optimal mRNA transfection efficiency and the ability of spleen-targeted delivery. In addition, O12-Tta-CDs can well transfect the immune cells and promote the maturation and antigen presentation of bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDCs). Furthermore, O12-Tta-CDs@OVA-mRNA was successfully applied to inhibit tumor growth, and more specific T-cell infiltration was observed in spleen and tumors of mice after treatment in the E.G7-OVA tumor model. Besides, O12-Tta-CDs@OVA-mRNA also achieved a good therapeutic effect in tumor recurrence inhibition and tumor prophylactic experiments. This study provided a new direction for the design of mRNA vectors, which is promising in tumor immunotherapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
