---
pmid: '37056275'
doi: 10.1016/j.bioactmat.2022.07.016
pmcid: PMC10087757
title: Activation of pyroptosis by specific organelle-targeting photodynamic therapy
  to amplify immunogenic cell death for anti-tumor immunotherapy.
authors:
- Zeng Shuang
- Chen Chen
- Zhang Liuwei
- Liu Xiaosheng
- Qian Ming
- Cui Hongyan
- Wang Jingyun
- Chen Qixian
- Peng Xiaojun
journal: Bioactive materials
year: 2023
month: 7
volume: '25'
issue: ''
pages: 580-593
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2022.07.016
cited_by_count: 102
mesh_terms: []
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs:
- ROS
- reactive oxygen species
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- ICD
- Pyroptosis
- cancerous
- immunogenic cell death
- metastasis
- pyroptosis
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 68
icite_rcr: 4.529575427724568
icite_percentile: 91.8
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Activation of pyroptosis by specific organelle-targeting photodynamic therapy to amplify immunogenic cell death for anti-tumor immunotherapy.

## Abstract

Pyroptosis, a unique lytic programmed cell death, inspired tempting implications as potent anti-tumor strategy in pertinent to its potentials in stimulating anti-tumor immunity for eradication of primary tumors and metastasis. Nonetheless, rare therapeutics have been reported to successfully stimulate pyroptosis. In view of the intimate participation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in stimulating pyroptosis, we attempted to devise a spectrum of well-defined subcellular organelle (including mitochondria, lysosomes and endoplasmic reticulum)-targeting photosensitizers with the aim of precisely localizing ROS (produced from photosensitizers) at the subcellular compartments and explore their potentials in urging pyroptosis and immunogenic cell death (ICD). The subsequent investigations revealed varied degrees of pyroptosis upon photodynamic therapy (PDT) towards cancerous cells, as supported by not only observation of the distinctive morphological and mechanistic characteristics of pyroptosis, but for the first-time explicit validation from comprehensive RNA-Seq analysis. Furthermore, in vivo anti-tumor PDT could exert eradication of the primary tumors, more importantly suppressed the distant tumor and metastatic tumor growth through an abscopal effect, approving the acquirement of specific anti-tumor immunity as a consequence of pyroptosis. Hence, pyroptosis was concluded unprecedently by our proposed organelles-targeting PDT strategy and explicitly delineated with molecular insights into its occurrence and the consequent ICD.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
