---
pmid: '37156740'
doi: 10.1002/smll.202301519
pmcid: ''
title: Lactate-Responsive Gene Editing to Synergistically Enhance Macrophage-Mediated
  Cancer Immunotherapy.
authors:
- Li Yuwei
- Wei Yue
- Huang Ying
- Qin Geng
- Zhao Chuanqi
- Ren Jinsong
- Qu Xiaogang
journal: Small (Weinheim an der Bergstrasse, Germany)
year: 2023
month: 8
volume: '19'
issue: '35'
pages: e2301519
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 43
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Gene Editing
- Lactic Acid
- Macrophages
- Neoplasms
- Immunotherapy
- Tumor Microenvironment
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- crispr
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes:
- CD47
- LOx
- SIRPalpha
- lactate oxidase
- signal-regulatory protein alpha
drugs:
- Lactate
- MOF
- lactate
- metal-organic framework
- pyruvate
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Phagocytosis and Immune Regulation
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- cancer
- tumor
- tumor-
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 32
icite_rcr: 2.9584551151794254
icite_percentile: 84.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Lactate-Responsive Gene Editing to Synergistically Enhance Macrophage-Mediated Cancer Immunotherapy.

## Abstract

Combination therapies involving metabolic regulation and immune checkpoint blockade are considered an encouraging new strategy for cancer therapy. However, the effective utilization of combination therapies for activating tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) remains challenging. Herein, a lactate-catalyzed chemodynamic approach to activate the therapeutic genome editing of signal-regulatory protein α (SIRPα) to reprogram TAMs and improve cancer immunotherapy is proposed. This system is constructed by encapsulating lactate oxidase (LOx) and clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat-mediated SIRPα genome-editing plasmids in a metal-organic framework (MOF). The genome-editing system is released and activated by acidic pyruvate, which is produced by the LOx-catalyzed oxidation of lactate. The synergy between lactate exhaustion and SIRPα signal blockade can enhance the phagocytic ability of TAMs and promote the repolarization of TAMs to the antitumorigenic M1 phenotype. Lactate exhaustion-induced CD47-SIRPα blockade efficiently improves macrophage antitumor immune responses and effectively reverses the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment to inhibit tumor growth, as demonstrated by in vitro and in vivo studies. This study provides a facile strategy for engineering TAMs in situ by combining CRISPR-mediated SIRPα knockout with lactate exhaustion for effective immunotherapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
