---
pmid: '37160171'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2023.166746
pmcid: ''
title: 'Targeting the tumor microenvironment: Potential strategy for cancer therapeutics.'
authors:
- Babar Quratulain
- Saeed Ayesha
- Tabish Tanveer A
- Sarwar Mohsin
- Thorat Nanasaheb D
journal: Biochimica et biophysica acta. Molecular basis of disease
year: 2023
month: 8
volume: '1869'
issue: '6'
pages: '166746'
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbadis.2023.166746
cited_by_count: 95
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Neoplasms
- Immunotherapy
- Fibroblasts
- Tumor Microenvironment
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer Research and Treatments
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- metastasis
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 76
icite_rcr: 8.598817803611897
icite_percentile: 97.1
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Targeting the tumor microenvironment: Potential strategy for cancer therapeutics.

## Abstract

Cellular and stromal components including tumor cells, immune cells, mesenchymal cells, cancer-linked fibroblasts, and extracellular matrix, constituent tumor microenvironment (TME). TME plays a crucial role in reprogramming tumor initiation, uncontrolled proliferation, invasion and metastasis as well as response to therapeutic modalities. In recent years targeting the TME has developed as a potential strategy for treatment of cancer because of its life-threatening functions in restricting tumor development and modulating responses to standard-of-care medicines. Cold atmospheric plasma, oncolytic viral therapy, bacterial therapy, nano-vaccine, and repurposed pharmaceuticals with combination therapy, antiangiogenic drugs, and immunotherapies are among the most effective therapies directed by TME that have either been clinically authorized or are currently being studied. This article discusses above-mentioned therapies in light of targeting TME. We also cover problems related to the TME-targeted therapies, as well as future insights and practical uses in this rapidly growing field.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
