---
pmid: '37296177'
doi: 10.1038/s41571-023-00783-w
pmcid: ''
title: Optimizing the safety of antibody-drug conjugates for patients with solid tumours.
authors:
- Tarantino Paolo
- Ricciuti Biagio
- Pradhan Shan M
- Tolaney Sara M
journal: Nature reviews. Clinical oncology
year: 2023
month: 8
volume: '20'
issue: '8'
pages: 558-576
is_oa: true
oa_status: bronze
oa_url: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41571-023-00783-w.pdf
cited_by_count: 199
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Immunoconjugates
- Neoplasms
- Antineoplastic Agents
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- antibody-drug-conjugate
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: HER2/EGFR in Cancer Research
diseases_annotated:
- cancers
- solid tumours
- toxicities
- tumour
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 173
icite_rcr: 15.200245747105765
icite_percentile: 99.0
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.95
icite_enriched: true
---

# Optimizing the safety of antibody-drug conjugates for patients with solid tumours.

## Abstract

Over the past 5 years, improvements in the design of antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) have enabled major advances that have reshaped the treatment of several advanced-stage solid tumours. Considering the intended rationale behind the design of ADCs, which is to achieve targeted delivery of cytotoxic molecules by linking them to antibodies targeting tumour-specific antigens, ADCs would be expected to be less toxic than conventional chemotherapy. However, most ADCs are still burdened by off-target toxicities that resemble those of the cytotoxic payload as well as on-target toxicities and other poorly understood and potentially life-threatening adverse effects. Given the rapid expansion in the clinical indications of ADCs, including use in curative settings and various combinations, extensive efforts are ongoing to improve their safety. Approaches currently being pursued include clinical trials optimizing the dose and treatment schedule, modifications of each ADC component, identification of predictive biomarkers for toxicities, and the development of innovative diagnostic tools. In this Review, we describe the determinants of the toxicities of ADCs in patients with solid tumours, highlighting key strategies that are expected to improve tolerability and enable improvements in the treatment outcomes of patients with advanced-stage and those with early stage cancers in the years to come.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
