---
pmid: '37364479'
doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2023.115040
pmcid: ''
title: 'Gut microbiota interactions with antitumor immunity in colorectal cancer:
  From understanding to application.'
authors:
- Zhuang Yu-Pei
- Zhou Hong-Li
- Chen Hai-Bin
- Zheng Ming-Yue
- Liang Yu-Wei
- Gu Yu-Tian
- Li Wen-Ting
- Qiu Wen-Li
- Zhou Hong-Guang
journal: Biomedicine & pharmacotherapy = Biomedecine & pharmacotherapie
year: 2023
month: 9
volume: '165'
issue: ''
pages: '115040'
is_oa: true
oa_status: gold
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2023.115040
cited_by_count: 28
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome
- Immunotherapy
- Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors
- Colorectal Neoplasms
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- microbiome
cancer_types:
- colorectal
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Gut microbiota and health
diseases_annotated:
- CRC
- Colorectal cancer
- cancer
- cancers
- colorectal cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 24
icite_rcr: 2.765514838742801
icite_percentile: 83.1
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Gut microbiota interactions with antitumor immunity in colorectal cancer: From understanding to application.

## Abstract

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of highly prevalent cancer. Immunotherapy with immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) has dramatically changed the landscape of treatment for many advanced cancers, but CRC still exhibits suboptimal response to immunotherapy. The gut microbiota can affect both anti-tumor and pro-tumor immune responses, and further modulate the efficacy of cancer immunotherapy, particularly in the context of therapy with ICIs. Therefore, a deeper understanding of how the gut microbiota modulates immune responses is crucial to improve the outcomes of CRC patients receiving immunotherapy and to overcome resistance in nonresponders. The present review aims to describe the relationship between the gut microbiota, CRC, and antitumor immune responses, with a particular focus on key studies and recent findings on the effect of the gut microbiota on the antitumor immune activity. We also discuss the potential mechanisms by which the gut microbiota influences host antitumor immune responses as well as the prospective role of intestinal flora in CRC treatment. Furthermore, the therapeutic potential and limitations of different modulation strategies for the gut microbiota are also discussed. These insights may facilitate to better comprehend the interplay between the gut microbiota and the antitumor immune responses of CRC patients and provide new research pathways to enhance immunotherapy efficacy and expand the patient population that could be benefited by immunotherapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
