---
pmid: '37385565'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2023.188946
pmcid: ''
title: Reinforcing the immunogenic cell death to enhance cancer immunotherapy efficacy.
authors:
- Yu Sihui
- Xiao Hongyang
- Ma Li
- Zhang Jiawen
- Zhang Jiarong
journal: Biochimica et biophysica acta. Reviews on cancer
year: 2023
month: 9
volume: '1878'
issue: '5'
pages: '188946'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 37
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Immunogenic Cell Death
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Neoplasms
- Phototherapy
- Immunotherapy
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer Immunotherapy and Biomarkers
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- malignancy
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 35
icite_rcr: 3.232356224415181
icite_percentile: 86.4
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Reinforcing the immunogenic cell death to enhance cancer immunotherapy efficacy.

## Abstract

Immunogenic cell death (ICD) has been a revolutionary modality in cancer treatment since it kills primary tumors and prevents recurrent malignancy simultaneously. ICD represents a particular form of cancer cell death accompanied by production of damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) that can be recognized by pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), which enhances infiltration of effector T cells and potentiates antitumor immune responses. Various treatment methods can elicit ICD involving chemo- and radio-therapy, phototherapy and nanotechnology to efficiently convert dead cancer cells into vaccines and trigger the antigen-specific immune responses. Nevertheless, the efficacy of ICD-induced therapies is restrained due to low accumulation in the tumor sites and damage of normal tissues. Thus, researchers have been devoted to overcoming these problems with novel materials and strategies. In this review, current knowledge on different ICD modalities, various ICD inducers, development and application of novel ICD-inducing strategies are summarized. Moreover, the prospects and challenges are briefly outlined to provide reference for future design of novel immunotherapy based on ICD effect.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
