---
pmid: '37407355'
doi: 10.1016/j.cytogfr.2023.06.006
pmcid: ''
title: 'Targeting the metabolism and immune system in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma:
  Insights and future directions.'
authors:
- Bandi Dhana Sekhar Reddy
- Sarvesh Sujith
- Farran Batoul
- Nagaraju Ganji Purnachandra
- El-Rayes Bassel F
journal: Cytokine & growth factor reviews
year: 2023
month: null
volume: 71-72
issue: ''
pages: 26-39
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 18
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Pancreatic Neoplasms
- Carcinoma, Pancreatic Ductal
- Immunotherapy
- Macrophages
- Tumor Microenvironment
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types:
- pancreatic
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Immune cells in cancer
diseases_annotated:
- PDAC
- Pancreatic cancer
- lysosomal dysfunction
- pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 16
icite_rcr: 1.2876536020759397
icite_percentile: 59.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Targeting the metabolism and immune system in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma: Insights and future directions.

## Abstract

Pancreatic cancer, specifically pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), presents a challenging landscape due to its complex nature and the highly immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment (TME). This immunosuppression severely limits the effectiveness of immune-based therapies. Studies have revealed the critical role of immunometabolism in shaping the TME and influencing PDAC progression. Genetic alterations, lysosomal dysfunction, gut microbiome dysbiosis, and altered metabolic pathways have been shown to modulate immunometabolism in PDAC. These metabolic alterations can significantly impact immune cell functions, including T-cells, myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), and macrophages, evading anti-tumor immunity. Advances in immunotherapy offer promising avenues for overcoming immunosuppressive TME and enhancing patient outcomes. This review highlights the challenges and opportunities for future research in this evolving field. By exploring the connections between immunometabolism, genetic alterations, and the microbiome in PDAC, it is possible to tailor novel approaches capable of improving immunotherapy outcomes and addressing the limitations posed by immunosuppressive TME. Ultimately, these insights may pave the way for improved treatment options and better outcomes for PDAC patients.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
