---
pmid: '37542862'
doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2023.154720
pmcid: ''
title: 'Virus-associated neuroendocrine cancers: Pathogenesis and current therapeutics.'
authors:
- Banerjee Juni
- Ranjan Ramya P
- Alam Md Tanjim
- Deshmukh Sanika
- Tripathi Prem Prakash
- Gandhi Sonu
- Banerjee Shuvomoy
journal: Pathology, research and practice
year: 2023
month: 8
volume: '248'
issue: ''
pages: '154720'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 2
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Epstein-Barr Virus Infections
- Herpesvirus 4, Human
- Neuroendocrine Tumors
- Herpesvirus 8, Human
- Carcinoma, Neuroendocrine
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- oncolytic-virus
cancer_types:
- sarcoma
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Neuroendocrine Tumor Research Advances
diseases_annotated:
- NEN
- NENs
- NET
- Neuroendocrine neoplasms
- Virus-associated neuroendocrine cancers
- neuroendocrine tumor
- neuroendocrine tumors
- tumor viruses
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 2
icite_rcr: 0.16914033427889086
icite_percentile: 8.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Virus-associated neuroendocrine cancers: Pathogenesis and current therapeutics.

## Abstract

Neuroendocrine neoplasms (NENs) comprise malignancies involving neuroendocrine cells that often lead to fatal pathological conditions. Despite escalating global incidences, NENs still have poor prognoses. Interestingly, research indicates an intricate association of tumor viruses with NENs. However, there is a dearth of comprehension of the complete scenario of NEN pathophysiology and its precise connections with the tumor viruses. Interestingly, several cutting-edge experiments became helpful for further screening of NET for the presence of polyomavirus, Human papillomavirus (HPV), Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), Epstein Barr virus (EBV), etc. Current research on the neuroendocrine tumor (NET) pathogenesis provides new information concerning their molecular mechanisms and therapeutic interventions. Of note, scientists observed that metastatic neuroendocrine tumors still have a poor prognosis with a palliative situation. Different oncolytic vector has already demonstrated excellent efficacies in clinical studies. Therefore, oncolytic virotherapy or virus-based immunotherapy could be an emerging and novel therapeutic intervention. In-depth understanding of all such various aspects will aid in managing, developing early detection assays, and establishing targeted therapeutic interventions for NENs concerning tumor viruses. Hence, this review takes a novel approach to discuss the dual role of tumor viruses in association with NENs' pathophysiology as well as its potential therapeutic interventions.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
