---
pmid: '37672732'
doi: 10.1002/adhm.202302028
pmcid: ''
title: Strategies to Reverse Hypoxic Tumor Microenvironment for Enhanced Sonodynamic
  Therapy.
authors:
- Li Jialun
- Yue Zhengya
- Tang Minglu
- Wang Wenxin
- Sun Yuan
- Sun Tiedong
- Chen Chunxia
journal: Advanced healthcare materials
year: 2024
month: 1
volume: '13'
issue: '1'
pages: e2302028
is_oa: true
oa_status: bronze
oa_url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdfdirect/10.1002/adhm.202302028
cited_by_count: 66
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Ultrasonic Therapy
- Tumor Microenvironment
- Neoplasms
- Hypoxia
- Oxygen
- Reactive Oxygen Species
- Cell Line, Tumor
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- sonodynamic
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invitro
genes: []
drugs:
- ROS
- oxygen
- reactive oxygen species
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- Hypoxic Tumor
- hypoxia
- malignant tumors
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 50
icite_rcr: 9.464152175660713
icite_percentile: 97.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Strategies to Reverse Hypoxic Tumor Microenvironment for Enhanced Sonodynamic Therapy.

## Abstract

Sonodynamic therapy (SDT) has emerged as a highly effective modality for the treatment of malignant tumors owing to its powerful penetration ability, noninvasiveness, site-confined irradiation, and excellent therapeutic efficacy. However, the traditional SDT, which relies on oxygen availability, often fails to generate a satisfactory level of reactive oxygen species because of the widespread issue of hypoxia in the tumor microenvironment of solid tumors. To address this challenge, various approaches are developed to alleviate hypoxia and improve the efficiency of SDT. These strategies aim to either increase oxygen supply or prevent hypoxia exacerbation, thereby enhancing the effectiveness of SDT. In view of this, the current review provides an overview of these strategies and their underlying principles, focusing on the circulation of oxygen from consumption to external supply. The detailed research examples conducted using these strategies in combination with SDT are also discussed. Additionally, this review highlights the future prospects and challenges of the hypoxia-alleviated SDT, along with the key considerations for future clinical applications. These considerations include the development of efficient oxygen delivery systems, the accurate methods for hypoxia detection, and the exploration of combination therapies to optimize SDT outcomes.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
