---
pmid: '37748773'
doi: 10.1002/adhm.202302268
pmcid: ''
title: Ex Vivo Evaluation of Combination Immunotherapy Using Tumor-Microenvironment-on-Chip.
authors:
- Mu Hsuan-Yu
- Lin Chiao-Min
- Chu Li-An
- Lin Ya-Hui
- Li Ji
- Liu Chao-Yu
- Huang Hsi-Chien
- Cheng Sheng-Liang
- Lee Tsung-Ying
- Lee Hsin Mei
- Chen Hsin-Min
- Tsai Yun-Jen
- Chen Yunching
- Huang Jen-Huang
journal: Advanced healthcare materials
year: 2024
month: 1
volume: '13'
issue: '2'
pages: e2302268
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 9
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes
- Tumor Microenvironment
- Immunotherapy
- Neoplasms
- Treatment Outcome
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes:
- CD8
drugs:
- oxygen
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: 3D Printing in Biomedical Research
diseases_annotated:
- Tumor
- breast cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 7
icite_rcr: 1.2105822263147765
icite_percentile: 57.3
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Ex Vivo Evaluation of Combination Immunotherapy Using Tumor-Microenvironment-on-Chip.

## Abstract

Combination immunotherapy has emerged as a promising strategy to address the challenges associated with immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) therapy in breast cancer. The efficacy of combination immunotherapy hinges upon the intricate and dynamic nature of the tumor microenvironment (TME), characterized by cellular heterogeneity and molecular gradients. However, current methodologies for drug screening often fail to accurately replicate these complex conditions, resulting in limited predictive capacity for treatment outcomes. Here, a tumor-microenvironment-on-chip (TMoC), integrating a circulation system and ex vivo tissue culture with physiological oxygen and nutrient gradients, is described. This platform enables spatial infiltration of cytotoxic CD8+ T cells and their targeted attack on the tumor, while preserving the high complexity and heterogeneity of the TME. The TMoC is employed to assess the synergistic effect of five targeted therapy drugs and five chemotherapy drugs in combination with immunotherapy, demonstrating strong concordance between chip and animal model responses. The TMoC holds significant potential for advancing drug development and guiding clinical decision-making, as it offers valuable insights into the complex dynamics of the TME.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
