---
pmid: '37742278'
doi: 10.1080/14737140.2023.2257885
pmcid: ''
title: 'The emergence of targeted therapy for HER2-low triple-negative breast cancer:
  a review of fam-trastuzumab deruxtecan.'
authors:
- Schreiber Anna R
- O'Bryant Cindy L
- Kabos Peter
- Diamond Jennifer R
journal: Expert review of anticancer therapy
year: 2023
month: null
volume: '23'
issue: '10'
pages: 1061-1069
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 10
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Female
- Breast Neoplasms
- Triple Negative Breast Neoplasms
- Trastuzumab
- Immunoconjugates
- Camptothecin
- Erb-b2 Receptor Tyrosine Kinases
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- antibody-drug-conjugate
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: phase3-clinical
genes: []
drugs:
- DXd
- T-DXd
- trastuzumab deruxtecan
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: HER2/EGFR in Cancer Research
diseases_annotated:
- TNBC
- breast cancer
- breast cancers
- cancers
- interstitial lung disease
- triple-negative breast cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 10
icite_rcr: 1.2736447663830612
icite_percentile: 59.2
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# The emergence of targeted therapy for HER2-low triple-negative breast cancer: a review of fam-trastuzumab deruxtecan.

## Abstract

**INTRODUCTION**: Metastatic triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive sub-type of breast cancer. Despite recent advances, metastatic TNBC remains difficult to treat with limited targeted treatment options. Fam-trastuzumab deruxtecan (T-DXd), is a novel antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) targeting human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) and is composed of a unique linker bound to the topoisomerase I inhibitor DXd. T-DXd has significant anti-tumor activity in patients with HER2-low TNBC.

**AREAS COVERED**: This review reports on the mechanism, pre-clinical/clinical studies, efficacy, and tolerability of T-DXd. A literature search was conducted via PubMed using keywords such as 'fam-trastuzumab deruxtecan,' 'Enhertu,' and 'HER2-low cancers.'

**EXPERT OPINION**: The Phase III Destiny-Breast04 Trial showed benefit in progression-free and overall survival in patients with HER2-low metastatic breast cancers treated with T-DXd compared to treatment of physician's choice chemotherapy. T-DXd is the first pharmaceutical to effectively target a HER2-low population with clinically meaningful efficacy in patients with HER2-low TNBC. Compared to chemotherapy, T-DXd has a similar safety profile, with the additional need for close monitoring for interstitial lung disease. Given the clinical activity of T-DXd in TNBC, it is likely there will be continued efforts to refine HER2-low diagnostics and to develop additional ADCs with other protein targets.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
