---
pmid: '37800595'
doi: 10.1080/14712598.2023.2267975
pmcid: ''
title: Managing adverse events of sacituzumab govitecan.
authors:
- Schlam Ilana
- Tarantino Paolo
- Tolaney Sara M
journal: Expert opinion on biological therapy
year: 2023
month: null
volume: '23'
issue: '11'
pages: 1103-1111
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 29
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Antigens, Neoplasm
- Camptothecin
- Immunoconjugates
- Triple Negative Breast Neoplasms
- Diarrhea
- Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- antibody-drug-conjugate
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
- Trop2
- hormone receptor
drugs:
- SG
- Sacituzumab govitecan
- atropine
- loperamide
- sacituzumab govitecan
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: HER2/EGFR in Cancer Research
diseases_annotated:
- Anemia
- Fatigue
- Gastrointestinal toxicities
- Hematologic toxicities
- Neutropenia
- TNBC
- alopecia
- breast cancer
- cholinergic
- diarrhea
- toxicities
- toxicity
- triple-negative breast cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 24
icite_rcr: 2.7319838505302685
icite_percentile: 82.8
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Managing adverse events of sacituzumab govitecan.

## Abstract

**INTRODUCTION**: The development of antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) have revolutionized treatment for breast cancer. Sacituzumab govitecan (SG), a Trop2-targeted ADC, has demonstrated remarkable efficacy in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) and hormone receptor-positive metastatic breast cancer.

**AREAS COVERED**: We summarize the evidence for SG use in the treatment of metastatic breast cancer, discuss the toxicity profile, and present strategies to manage adverse events.

**EXPERT OPINION**: Hematologic toxicities are frequently observed with SG therapy. Neutropenia, reported in up to 72% of cases, often requires dose reductions or delays. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor can be helpful in managing and preventing this toxicity. Anemia is another common toxicity and patients may require transfusions of packed red blood cells. Gastrointestinal toxicities are also common. A tailored regimen of prophylactic antiemetics (2-3 agents) should be initiated before SG infusion. For diarrhea, infectious workup should be considered on a case-by-case basis; patients should start loperamide and fluid/electrolyte replacement if necessary. Severe diarrhea associated with cholinergic syndrome should prompt the administration of atropine. Fatigue occurs in approximately half of the patients receiving SG, and <50% of patients experience complete alopecia during treatment. The approval of SG has significantly improved treatment outcomes; however, effective management of the toxicities is critical to optimize patient care and treatment adherence.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
