---
pmid: '37839496'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2023.123512
pmcid: ''
title: '"Targeted plus controlled" - Composite nano delivery system opens the tumor
  vascular and microenvironment normalization window for anti-tumor therapy.'
authors:
- Shen Ruoyu
- Jiang Qi
- Li Peirong
- Wang Ding
- Yu Caini
- Meng Tingting
- Hu Fuqiang
- Yuan Hong
journal: International journal of pharmaceutics
year: 2023
month: 11
volume: '647'
issue: ''
pages: '123512'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 5
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Nanoparticle Drug Delivery System
- Angiogenesis Inhibitors
- Neoplasms
- Doxorubicin
- Pharmaceutical Preparations
- Tumor Microenvironment
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs:
- P-V@MG
- PHMEMA
- V@MG
- Vandetanib
- doxorubicin hydrochloride
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- breast cancer
- cancer
- hypoxia
- metastasize
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 5
icite_rcr: 0.4325118482150889
icite_percentile: 23.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# "Targeted plus controlled" - Composite nano delivery system opens the tumor vascular and microenvironment normalization window for anti-tumor therapy.

## Abstract

The bottleneck of traditional anti-tumor therapy is mainly limited by the abnormal microenvironment of tumors. Leaky vessels are difficult for drugs or immune cells to penetrate deep into tumors, but tumor cells can easily escape through which and metastasize to other organs. Reprogramming the tumor microenvironment is one of the main directions for anti-cancer research, among which, tumor vascular normalization has received increasing attention. However, how to control the dose and time of anti-angiogenic drugs for stable vascular normalizing effect limits it for further research. We developed a composite nano delivery system, P-V@MG, with double delivery function of pH-responsibility and sustained drug release. The PHMEMA shell improves amphiphilicity of nano delivery system and prolongs in vivo retention, and releases V@MG in the weakly acidic tumor microenvironment, which slowly release anti-angiogenic drugs, Vandetanib. We found that P-V@MG not only prolonged the normalization window of tumor vascular but also reprogram tumor microenvironment with increased perfusion, immune cells infiltration and relieved hypoxia, which further opened the pathway for other anti-cancer therapeutics. This synergy was proved by the improving anti-tumor efficiency by combination of P-V@MG with the doxorubicin hydrochloride in 4 T1 breast cancer model suggesting the desirable value of pro-vascular normalization nano delivery systems in the field of anti-tumor combination therapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
