---
pmid: '37863773'
doi: 10.1016/j.scib.2023.10.004
pmcid: ''
title: Electrical stimulation induces anti-tumor immunomodulation via a flexible microneedle-array-integrated
  interdigital electrode.
authors:
- Pan Yixuan
- Zhang Yangxi
- Shi Xueying
- Li Dongdong
- Xu Xiaodan
- Xiao Bing
- Piao Ying
- Xiang Jiajia
- Shao Shiqun
- Ho Frederic Chun-Yip
- Shen Youqing
- Zhang A Ping
- Tang Jianbin
journal: Science bulletin
year: 2023
month: 11
volume: '68'
issue: '22'
pages: 2779-2792
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 30
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Electrodes
- Electric Stimulation
- Immunotherapy
- Lung Neoplasms
- Biological Factors
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- ttfields
cancer_types:
- lung
- melanoma
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- Ca2+
- ROS
- polymer
- reactive oxygen species
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Neuroscience and Neural Engineering
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- cancers
- death
- melanoma lung metastasis
- necrotic cell
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 13
icite_rcr: 1.541654794159539
icite_percentile: 66.0
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Electrical stimulation induces anti-tumor immunomodulation via a flexible microneedle-array-integrated interdigital electrode.

## Abstract

Immunotherapy has revolutionized cancer therapy, using chemical or biological agents to reinvigorate the immune system. However, most of these agents have poor tumor penetration and inevitable side effects that complicate therapeutic outcomes. Electrical stimulation (ES) is a promising alternative therapy against cancers that does not involve chemical or biological agents but is limited in the fabrication and operation of complex micrometer-scale ES devices. Here, we present an optically microprinted flexible interdigital electrode with a gold-plated polymer microneedle array to generate alternating electric fields for cancer treatment. A flexible microneedle-array-integrated interdigital electrode (FMIE) was fabricated by combining optical 3D microprinting and electroless plating processes. FMIE-mediated ES of cancer cells induced necrotic cell death through mitochondrial Ca2+ overload and increased intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. This led to the release of damage-associated molecular patterns that activated the immune response and potentiated immunogenic cell death (ICD). FMIE-based ES has an excellent safety profile and systemic anti-tumor effects, inhibiting the growth of primary and distant tumors as well as melanoma lung metastasis. FMIE-based ES-driven cancer immunomodulation provides a new pathway for drug-free cancer therapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
