---
pmid: '37880861'
doi: 10.1002/smll.202306905
pmcid: ''
title: Sialic Acid-Functionalized Pyroptosis Nanotuner for Epigenetic Regulation and
  Enhanced Cancer Immunotherapy.
authors:
- Hu Jiahao
- You Yuchan
- Zhu Luwen
- Zhang Jucong
- Song Yanling
- Lu Jingyi
- Xu Xinyi
- Wu Xiaochuan
- Huang Xiajie
- Xu Xiaoling
- Du Yongzhong
journal: Small (Weinheim an der Bergstrasse, Germany)
year: 2024
month: 3
volume: '20'
issue: '10'
pages: e2306905
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 14
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Pyroptosis
- N-Acetylneuraminic Acid
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes
- Epigenesis, Genetic
- Immunotherapy
- Liposomes
- Neoplasms
- Tumor Microenvironment
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- epigenetic
- immunotherapy
- nanoparticle
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- CD8
- caspase-3
drugs:
- Sialic Acid
- decitabine
- sialic acid
- triclabendazole
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Inflammasome and immune disorders
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- Pyroptosis
- pyroptosis
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 11
icite_rcr: 1.5880736942755953
icite_percentile: 67.0
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Sialic Acid-Functionalized Pyroptosis Nanotuner for Epigenetic Regulation and Enhanced Cancer Immunotherapy.

## Abstract

The efficacy of immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) in promoting an immune response against tumors still encounters challenges such as low response rates and off-target effects. Pyroptosis, an immunogenic cell death (ICD) mechanism, holds the potential to overcome the limitations of ICB by activating and recruiting immune cells. However, the expression of the pyroptosis-related protein Gasdermin-E(GSDME) in some tumors is limited due to mRNA methylation. To overcome this obstacle, sialic acid-functionalized liposomes coloaded with decitabine, a demethylation drug, and triclabendazole, a pyroptosis-inducing drug are developed. This nanosystem primarily accumulates at tumor sites via sialic acid and the Siglec receptor, elevating liposome accumulation in tumors up to 3.84-fold at 24 h and leading to the upregulation of pyroptosis-related proteins and caspase-3/GSDME-dependent pyroptosis. Consequently, it facilitates the infiltration of CD8+ T cells into the tumor microenvironment and enhances the efficacy of ICB therapy. The tumor inhibition rate of the treatment group is 89.1% at 21 days. This study highlights the potential of sialic acid-functionalized pyroptosis nanotuners as a promising approach for improving the efficacy of ICB therapy in tumors with low GSDME expression through epigenetic alteration and ICD.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
