---
pmid: '37918451'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2023.189014
pmcid: ''
title: Role of the intratumoral microbiome in tumor progression and therapeutics implications.
authors:
- Meng Yu-Fan
- Fan Zhi-Yao
- Zhou Bin
- Zhan Han-Xiang
journal: Biochimica et biophysica acta. Reviews on cancer
year: 2023
month: 11
volume: '1878'
issue: '6'
pages: '189014'
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbcan.2023.189014
cited_by_count: 16
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Microbiota
- Neoplasms
- Carcinogenesis
- Immunotherapy
- Signal Transduction
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Pancreatic and Hepatic Oncology Research
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- metastasis
- solid tumors
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 15
icite_rcr: 1.3922474306722157
icite_percentile: 62.4
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Role of the intratumoral microbiome in tumor progression and therapeutics implications.

## Abstract

Microbes are widely present in various organs of the human body and play important roles in numerous physiological and pathological processes. Nevertheless, owing to multiple limiting factors, such as contamination and low biomass, the current understanding of the intratumoral microbiome is limited. The intratumoral microbiome exerts tumor-promoting or tumor-suppressive effects by engaging in metabolic reactions within the body, regulating signaling cancer-related pathways, and impacting both host cells function and immune system. It is important to emphasize that intratumoral microbes exhibit substantial heterogeneity in terms of composition and abundance across various tumor types, thereby potentially influencing diverse aspects of tumorigenesis, progression, and metastasis. These findings suggest that intratumoral microbiome have great potential as diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers. By manipulating the intratumoral microbes to employ cancer therapy, the efficacy of chemotherapy or immunotherapy can be enhanced while minimizing adverse effects. In this review, we comprehensively describe the composition and function of the intratumoral microbiome in various human solid tumors. Combining recent advancements in research, we discuss the origins, mechanisms, and prospects of the clinical applications of intratumoral microbiome.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
