---
pmid: '37990414'
doi: 10.1002/adhm.202302691
pmcid: ''
title: Delivery of mRNA Vaccine with 1, 2-Diesters-Derived Lipids Elicits Fast Liver
  Clearance for Safe and Effective Cancer Immunotherapy.
authors:
- Xu Yuandong
- Hu Yuexiao
- Xia Heng
- Zhang Shiqiang
- Lei Hanqi
- Yan Binyuan
- Xiao Ze Xiu
- Chen Jinjin
- Pang Jun
- Zha Gao-Feng
journal: Advanced healthcare materials
year: 2024
month: 2
volume: '13'
issue: '5'
pages: e2302691
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 15
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- mRNA Vaccines
- RNA, Messenger
- Liver
- Neoplasms
- Cancer Vaccines
- Vaccination
- Lipids
- Nanoparticles
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- mRNA-vaccine
- nanoparticle
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- E7
- Mrna
- mRNA
- ovalbumin
drugs:
- ', 2-diester'
- 1, 2-diesters
- 1,2-diesters
- ALC-0315 lipid
- DLin-MC3-DMA
- LNP
- Lipids
- amines
- epoxide
- lipids
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: RNA Interference and Gene Delivery
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- cancer
- liver-related damage
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 15
icite_rcr: 2.5406148115306553
icite_percentile: 81.1
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Delivery of mRNA Vaccine with 1, 2-Diesters-Derived Lipids Elicits Fast Liver Clearance for Safe and Effective Cancer Immunotherapy.

## Abstract

Messenger RNA (mRNA) vaccine is explored as a promising strategy for cancer immunotherapy, but the side effects, especially the liver-related damage caused by LNP, raise concerns about its safety. In this study, a novel library of 248 ionizable lipids comprising 1,2-diesters is designed via a two-step process involving the epoxide ring-opening reaction with carboxyl group-containing alkyl chains followed by an esterification reaction with the tertiary amines. Owing to the special chemical structure of 1,2-diesters, the top-performing lipids and formulations exhibit a faster clearance rate in the liver, contributing to increased stability and higher safety compared with DLin-MC3-DMA. Moreover, the LNP shows superior intramuscular mRNA delivery and elicits robust antigen-specific immune activation. The vaccinations delivered by the LNP system suppress tumor growth and prolong survival in both model human papillomavirus E7 and ovalbumin antigen-expressing tumor models. Finally, the structure of lipids which enhances the protein expression in the spleen and draining lymph nodes compared with ALC-0315 lipid in Comirnaty is further optimized. In conclusion, the 1, 2-diester-derived lipids exhibit rapid liver clearance and effective anticancer efficiency to different types of antigens-expressing tumor models, which may be a safe and universal platform for mRNA vaccines.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
