---
pmid: '38038679'
doi: 10.1021/acsnano.3c07932
pmcid: ''
title: 'Poly(ethyl ethylene phosphate): Overcoming the "Polyethylene Glycol Dilemma"
  for Cancer Immunotherapy and mRNA Vaccination.'
authors:
- Yu Xinyang
- Li Hongjian
- Dong Chunbo
- Qi Shaolong
- Yang Kai
- Bai Bing
- Peng Kun
- Buljan Marija
- Lin Xin
- Liu Zhida
- Yu Guocan
journal: ACS nano
year: 2023
month: 12
volume: '17'
issue: '23'
pages: 23814-23828
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 29
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Polyethylene Glycols
- Liposomes
- Neoplasms
- Immunotherapy
- Vaccination
- Ethylenes
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- mRNA-vaccine
- nanoparticle
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes:
- PEG
drugs:
- PEEP
- PEEPlipo@OxPt
- PEEPylated
- PEGlipo@OxPt
- Poly(ethyl ethylene phosphate)
- Polyethylene Glycol
- Polyethylene glycol
- oxaliplatin
- poly(ethyl ethylene phosphate)
- polymers
- water
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: RNA Interference and Gene Delivery
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 16
icite_rcr: 1.7377810776406561
icite_percentile: 70.0
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Poly(ethyl ethylene phosphate): Overcoming the "Polyethylene Glycol Dilemma" for Cancer Immunotherapy and mRNA Vaccination.

## Abstract

Polyethylene glycol conjugation (PEGylation) is the most successful strategy to promote the stability, pharmacokinetics, and efficacy of therapeutics; however, anti-PEG antibodies induced by repeated treatments raise serious concerns about the future of PEGylated therapeutics. In order to solve the "PEG dilemma", polymers with excellent water solubility and biocompatibility are urgently desired to attenuate the generation of anti-PEG antibodies. Here, poly(ethyl ethylene phosphate) (PEEP) with excellent degradability and stealth effects is used as an alternative to PEG to overcome the "PEG dilemma". PEEPylated liposomes exhibit lower immunogenicity and generate negligible anti-PEEP antibodies (IgM and IgG) after repeated treatments. In vivo studies confirm that PEEPylated liposomes loaded with oxaliplatin (PEEPlipo@OxPt) show better pharmacokinetics compared to PEGlipo@OxPt, and they exhibit potent antitumor performances, which can be further promoted with checkpoint blockade immunotherapy. In addition, PEEPylated lipid nanoparticle is also used to develop an mRNA vaccine with the ability to evoke a potent antigen-specific T cell response and achieve excellent antitumor efficacy. PEEP shows promising potentials in the development of next-generation nanomedicines and vaccines with higher safety and efficacy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
