---
pmid: '38225106'
doi: 10.1016/bs.ircmb.2023.06.001
pmcid: ''
title: Preconditioning with immunogenic cell death-inducing treatments for subsequent
  immunotherapy.
authors:
- Pan Hui
- Liu Peng
- Kroemer Guido
- Kepp Oliver
journal: International review of cell and molecular biology
year: 2024
month: null
volume: '382'
issue: ''
pages: 279-294
is_oa: true
oa_status: green
oa_url: https://hal.science/hal-04601417/document
cited_by_count: 7
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Melanoma
- Immunogenic Cell Death
- Antibodies, Monoclonal
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Immunotherapy
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types:
- melanoma
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- CTLA-4
- PD-1
- PD-L1
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer Immunotherapy and Biomarkers
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- carcinomas
- melanoma
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 7
icite_rcr: 0.8241196735559089
icite_percentile: 43.2
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Preconditioning with immunogenic cell death-inducing treatments for subsequent immunotherapy.

## Abstract

Since the dawn of anticancer immunotherapy, the clinical use of immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICI) has increased exponentially. Monoclonal antibodies targeting CTLA-4 and the PD-1/PD-L1 interaction were first introduced for the treatment of patients with unresectable melanoma. In melanoma, ICI lead to durable regression in a significant number of patients and have thus been clinically approved as a first-line treatment of advanced disease. Over the past years an increasing number of regulatory approvals have been granted for the use of ICI in patients affected by a large range of distinct carcinomas. In retrospect surprisingly, it has been discovered that particularly successful chemotherapeutic treatments are able to trigger anticancer immune responses because they induce immunogenic cell death (ICD), hence killing cancer cells in a way that they elicit an immune response against tumor-associated antigens. Logically, preclinical studies as well as clinical trials are currently exploring the possibility to combine ICD inducers with ICI to obtain optimal therapeutic effects. Here, we provide a broad overview of current strategies for the implementation of combinatorial approaches involving ICD induction followed by ICI in anticancer therapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
