---
pmid: '38232332'
doi: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.3c04507
pmcid: ''
title: Hydrophobization of Ribonucleic Acids for Facile Systemic Delivery and Multifaceted
  Cancer Immunotherapy.
authors:
- Zhang Yuxi
- Chen Chaoran
- Su Miao
- Wang Junxia
- Li Cheng
- Yang Xianzhu
journal: Nano letters
year: 2024
month: 1
volume: '24'
issue: '4'
pages: 1376-1384
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 10
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Melanoma
- Immunotherapy
- Nanoparticles
- RNA, Small Interfering
- Micelles
- Lipids
- Neoplasms
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- nanoparticle
cancer_types:
- melanoma
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- CD47
- PD-L1
drugs:
- lipid
- polymer
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: RNA Interference and Gene Delivery
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- melanoma
- melanoma tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 7
icite_rcr: 1.1198213181980292
icite_percentile: 54.4
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Hydrophobization of Ribonucleic Acids for Facile Systemic Delivery and Multifaceted Cancer Immunotherapy.

## Abstract

Ribonucleic acids (RNAs) enable disease-related gene inhibition, expression, and editing and represent promising therapeutics in various diseases. The efficacy of RNA relies heavily on the presence of a secure and effective delivery system. Herein, we found that RNA could be hydrophobized by cationic lipid and ionizable lipid and conveniently coassemble with amphiphilic polymer to achieve micelle-like nanoparticles (MNP). The results of the study indicate that MNP exhibits a high level of efficiency in delivering RNA. Besides, the MNP encapsulating siRNA that targets CD47 and PD-L1 remarkably blocked these immune checkpoints in a melanoma tumor model and elicited a robust immune response. Moreover, the MNP encapsulating the mRNA of OVA achieved antigen translation and presentation, leading to an effective antitumor immunoprophylaxis outcome against OVA-expressing melanoma model. Our findings suggest that RNA hydrophobization could serve as a viable approach for delivering RNA, thereby facilitating the exploration of RNA therapy in disease treatment.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
