---
pmid: '38308868'
doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2024.108052
pmcid: ''
title: Reconstruction of cell-specific models capturing the influence of metabolism
  on DNA methylation in cancer.
authors:
- Barata Tânia
- Pereira Vítor
- Pires das Neves Ricardo
- Rocha Miguel
journal: Computers in biology and medicine
year: 2024
month: 3
volume: '170'
issue: ''
pages: '108052'
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0010482524001367
cited_by_count: 7
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- DNA Methylation
- Epigenesis, Genetic
- Cell Line
- Neoplasms
- Genome
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- epigenetic
- metabolic-targeting
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invitro
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Microbial Metabolic Engineering and Bioproduction
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- cancerous
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 6
icite_rcr: 1.394071383913078
icite_percentile: 62.4
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Reconstruction of cell-specific models capturing the influence of metabolism on DNA methylation in cancer.

## Abstract

The imbalance of epigenetic regulatory mechanisms such as DNA methylation, which can promote aberrant gene expression profiles without affecting the DNA sequence, may cause the deregulation of signaling, regulatory, and metabolic processes, contributing to a cancerous phenotype. Since some metabolites are substrates and cofactors of epigenetic regulators, their availability can be affected by characteristic cancer cell metabolic shifts, feeding cancer onset and progression through epigenetic deregulation. Hence, there is a need to study the influence of cancer metabolic reprogramming in DNA methylation to design new effective treatments. In this study, a generic Genome-Scale Metabolic Model (GSMM) of a human cell, integrating DNA methylation or demethylation reactions, was obtained and used for the reconstruction of Genome-Scale Metabolic Models enhanced with Enzymatic Constraints using Kinetic and Omics data (GECKOs) of 31 cancer cell lines. Furthermore, cell-line-specific DNA methylation levels were included in the models, as coefficients of a DNA composition pseudo-reaction, to depict the influence of metabolism over global DNA methylation in each of the cancer cell lines. Flux simulations demonstrated the ability of these models to provide simulated fluxes of exchange reactions similar to the equivalent experimentally measured uptake/secretion rates and to make good functional predictions. In addition, simulations found metabolic pathways, reactions and enzymes directly or inversely associated with the gene promoter methylation. Two potential candidates for targeted cancer epigenetic therapy were identified.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
