---
pmid: '38380542'
doi: 10.1002/anie.202402291
pmcid: ''
title: 'A Polymeric Nanoparticle to Co-Deliver Mitochondria-Targeting Peptides and
  Pt(IV) Prodrug: Toward High Loading Efficiency and Combination Efficacy.'
authors:
- Yang Jinpeng
- Yang Zhenlin
- Wang Hua
- Chang Yincheng
- Xu Jiang-Fei
- Zhang Xi
journal: Angewandte Chemie (International ed. in English)
year: 2024
month: 4
volume: '63'
issue: '18'
pages: e202402291
is_oa: true
oa_status: bronze
oa_url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdfdirect/10.1002/anie.202402291
cited_by_count: 31
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Prodrugs
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Neoplasms
- Nanoparticles
- Peptides
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Drug Delivery Systems
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types:
- lung
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs:
- ATP
- Peptides
- Pt
- Pt(IV) Prodrug
- Pt(IV) prodrug
- glutathione
- oxaliplatin
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Advanced biosensing and bioanalysis techniques
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- cytotoxic
- lung cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 24
icite_rcr: 4.573494959977436
icite_percentile: 91.9
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# A Polymeric Nanoparticle to Co-Deliver Mitochondria-Targeting Peptides and Pt(IV) Prodrug: Toward High Loading Efficiency and Combination Efficacy.

## Abstract

Developing combination chemotherapy systems with high drug loading efficiency at predetermined drug ratios to achieve a synergistic effect is important for cancer therapy. Herein, a polymeric dual-drug nanoparticle composed of a Pt(IV) prodrug derived from oxaliplatin and a mitochondria-targeting cytotoxic peptide is constructed through emulsion interfacial polymerization, which processes high drug loading efficiency and high biocompatibility. The depolymerization of polymeric dual-drug nanoparticle and the activation of Pt prodrug can be effectively triggered by the acidic tumor environment extracellularly and the high levels of glutathione intracellularly in cancer cells, respectively. The utilization of mitochondria-targeting peptide can inhibit ATP-dependent processes including drug efflux and DNA damage repair. This leads to increased accumulation of Pt-drugs within cancer cells. Eventually, the polymeric dual-drug nanoparticle demonstrates appreciable antitumor effects on both cell line derived and patient derived xenograft lung cancer model. It is highly anticipated that the polymeric dual-or multi-drug systems can be applied for combination chemotherapy to achieve enhanced anticancer activity and reduced side effects.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
