---
pmid: '38403882'
doi: 10.1002/wnan.1945
pmcid: ''
title: Recent advances in sonodynamic therapy strategies for pancreatic cancer.
authors:
- Cheng Peng
- Ming Shuai
- Cao Wei
- Wu Jixiao
- Tian Qiwei
- Zhu Jing
- Wei Wei
journal: Wiley interdisciplinary reviews. Nanomedicine and nanobiotechnology
year: 2024
month: null
volume: '16'
issue: '1'
pages: e1945
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 12
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Ultrasonic Therapy
- Neoplasms
- Pancreatic Neoplasms
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Reactive Oxygen Species
- Tumor Microenvironment
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
- sonodynamic
cancer_types:
- pancreatic
evidence_level: preclinical-invitro
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- Oncologic Disease
- Pancreatic cancer
- hypoxic
- malignancy of the
- pancreatic cancer
- system
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 8
icite_rcr: 1.9258936381136793
icite_percentile: 73.3
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Recent advances in sonodynamic therapy strategies for pancreatic cancer.

## Abstract

Pancreatic cancer, a prevalent malignancy of the digestive system, has a poor 5-year survival rate of around 10%. Although numerous minimally invasive alternative treatments, including photothermal therapy and photodynamic therapy, have shown effectiveness compared with traditional surgical procedures, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy. However, the application of these alternative treatments is constrained by their depth of penetration, making it challenging to treat pancreatic cancer situated deep within the tissue. Sonodynamic therapy (SDT) has emerged as a promising minimally invasive therapy method that is particularly potent against deep-seated tumors such as pancreatic cancer. However, the unique characteristics of pancreatic cancer, including a dense surrounding matrix, high reductivity, and a hypoxic tumor microenvironment, impede the efficient application of SDT. Thus, to guide the evolution of SDT for pancreatic cancer therapy, this review addresses these challenges, examines current strategies for effective SDT enhancement for pancreatic cancer, and investigates potential future advances to boost clinical applicability. This article is categorized under: Therapeutic Approaches and Drug Discovery > Nanomedicine for Oncologic Disease.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
