---
pmid: '38452386'
doi: 10.1088/1361-6528/ad312a
pmcid: ''
title: Novel silicene-mesoporous silica nanoparticles conjugated gemcitabine induced
  cellular apoptosis via upregulating NF-κB p65 nuclear translocation suppresses pancreatic
  cancer growthin vitroandin vivo.
authors:
- Chen Yuhang
- Cheng Chien-Shan
- Yang Peiwen
- Dong Shu
- Chen Lianyu
journal: Nanotechnology
year: 2024
month: 4
volume: '35'
issue: '25'
pages: ''
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1361-6528/ad312a/pdf
cited_by_count: 2
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Gemcitabine
- NF-kappa B
- Deoxycytidine
- Silicon Dioxide
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Apoptosis
- Pancreatic Neoplasms
- Nanoparticles
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types:
- pancreatic
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes:
- NF-kappaB p65
drugs:
- Gemcitabine
- SMSN@G
- silica
- silicene
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- Pancreatic cancer
- metastasis
- pancreatic cancer
- pancreatic neoplasm
- pancreatic tumor
- pancreatic tumors
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 2
icite_rcr: 0.4513706152264204
icite_percentile: 24.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Novel silicene-mesoporous silica nanoparticles conjugated gemcitabine induced cellular apoptosis via upregulating NF-κB p65 nuclear translocation suppresses pancreatic cancer growthin vitroandin vivo.

## Abstract

Pancreatic cancer's high fatality rates stem from its resistance to systemic drug delivery and aggressive metastasis, limiting the efficacy of conventional treatments. In this study, two-dimensional ultrathin silicene nanosheets were initially synthesized and near-infrared-responsive two-dimensional silicene-mesoporous silica nanoparticles (SMSNs) were successfully constructed to load the clinically-approved conventional pancreatic cancer chemotherapeutic drug gemcitabine. Experiments on nanoparticle characterization show that they have excellent photothermal conversion ability and stability. Then silicene-mesoporous silica nanoparticles loaded with gemcitabine nanoparticles (SMSN@G NPs) were employed in localized photothermal therapy to control pancreatic tumor growth and achieve therapeutic effects. Our research confirmed the functionality of SMSN@G NPs through immunoblotting and apoptotic assays, demonstrating its capacity to enhance the nuclear translocation of the NF-κB p65, further affect the protein levels of apoptosis-related genes, induce the apoptosis of tumor cells, and ultimately inhibit the growth of the tumor. Additionally, the study assessed the inhibitory role of SMSN@G NPs on pancreatic neoplasm growthin vivo, revealing its excellent biocompatibility. SMSN@G NPs have a nice application prospect for anti-pancreatic tumors.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
