---
pmid: '38458739'
doi: 10.1016/bs.pmbts.2024.01.001
pmcid: ''
title: Advances in the polymeric nanoparticulate delivery systems for RNA therapeutics.
authors:
- Sristi
- Almalki Waleed H
- Karwasra Ritu
- Gupta Garima
- Singh Surender
- Sharma Ajay
- Sahebkar Amirhossein
- Kesharwani Prashant
journal: Progress in molecular biology and translational science
year: 2024
month: null
volume: '204'
issue: ''
pages: 219-248
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 11
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Neoplasms
- Nanoparticles
- Drug Delivery Systems
- RNA, Small Interfering
- Polymers
pub_types:
- Review
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- lipid
- polymer
- water
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: RNA Interference and Gene Delivery
diseases_annotated:
- autoimmune diseases
- cancer
- cancers
- genetic disorders
- infectious diseases
- viral infections
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 7
icite_rcr: 1.3557928496540608
icite_percentile: 61.4
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Advances in the polymeric nanoparticulate delivery systems for RNA therapeutics.

## Abstract

RNA therapeutics have emerged as potential treatments for genetic disorders, infectious diseases, and cancer. RNA delivery to target cells for efficient therapeutic applications remains challenging due to instability and poor uptake. Polymeric nanoparticulate delivery systems offer stability, protection, and controlled release. These systems shield RNA from degradation, enabling efficient uptake and extended circulation. Various polymeric nanoparticle platforms have been explored, including lipid-based nanoparticles, polymeric micelles, dendrimers, and polymer-drug conjugates. This review outlines recent breakthroughs of recent advances, design principles, characterization techniques, and performance evaluation of these delivery systems. It highlights their potential in translating preclinical studies into clinical applications. Additionally, the review discusses the application of polymeric nanoparticles in ophthalmic drug delivery, particularly for medications that dissolve poorly in water, and the progress made in siRNA-based therapies for viral infections, autoimmune diseases, and cancers. SiRNA holds great promise for precision medicine and therapeutic intervention, with the ability to target specific genes and modulate disease-associated pathways. The versatility and potency of siRNA-based drugs offer a broader scope for therapeutic intervention compared to traditional biological drugs. As research in RNA therapeutics continues to advance, these technologies hold tremendous potential to revolutionize the treatment of various diseases and improve patient outcomes.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
