---
pmid: '38587876'
doi: 10.1021/acsnano.4c01132
pmcid: ''
title: Manganese-Doped Potassium Chloride Nanoelectrodes to Potentiate Electrochemical
  Immunotherapy.
authors:
- Wang Gang
- Li Jingrui
- Wang Li
- Yang Yuqi
- Wu Jie
- Tang Wei
- Lei Huali
- Cheng Liang
journal: ACS nano
year: 2024
month: 4
volume: '18'
issue: '16'
pages: 10885-10901
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 13
mesh_terms:
- Manganese
- Immunotherapy
- Mice
- Animals
- Electrodes
- Humans
- Electrochemical Techniques
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Mice, Inbred C57BL
- Cell Proliferation
- Mice, Inbred BALB C
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- electrolysis
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs:
- Cl-
- HClO
- Hypochlorous acid
- Manganese
- Mn2+
- PEG
- PMPC
- Potassium Chloride
- alphaCTLA-4
- manganese
- potassium chloride
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Neuroscience and Neural Engineering
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- cell death
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 5
icite_rcr: 0.7922910928012996
icite_percentile: 41.8
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Manganese-Doped Potassium Chloride Nanoelectrodes to Potentiate Electrochemical Immunotherapy.

## Abstract

Hypochlorous acid (HClO), as a powerful oxidizer, is obtained from the oxidation of Cl- ions during the electrochemical therapy (EChT) process for cancer therapy. However, the extracellular generated HClO is inadequate to inhibit effective tumor cell death. Herein, manganese-doped potassium chloride nanocubes (MPC NCs) fabricated and modified with amphipathic polymer PEG (PMPC NCs) to function as massive three-dimensional nanoelectrodes (NEs) were developed to enhance the generation of HClO for electrochemical immunotherapy under an alternating electric field. Under an square-wave alternating current (AC) electric field, the generation of HClO was boosted by PMPC NEs due to the enlarged active surface area, enhanced mass transfer rate, and improved electrocatalytic activity. Notably, PMPC NEs upregulated the intracellular HClO concentration to induce robust immunogenic cell death (ICD) under an AC electric field. Meanwhile, the electric-triggered release of Mn2+ effectively stimulated dendritic cells (DCs) maturation. In vivo results illustrated that PMPC-mediated EChT inhibited tumor growth and triggered the promotion of the immune response to regulate the tumor immune microenvironment. Based on the potent antitumor immunity, PMPC-mediated EChT was further combined with an immune checkpoint inhibitor (αCTLA-4) to realize combined EChT-immunotherapy, which demonstrated enhanced tumor inhibition of the primary tumors and an abscopal effect on distant tumors. To summarize, our work highlights the application of electrochemical-immunotherapy technology in tumor therapy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
