---
pmid: '38583833'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2024.131427
pmcid: ''
title: 'Review: N1-methyl-pseudouridine (m1Ψ): Friend or foe of cancer?'
authors:
- Rubio-Casillas Alberto
- Cowley David
- Raszek Mikolaj
- Uversky Vladimir N
- Redwan Elrashdy M
journal: International journal of biological macromolecules
year: 2024
month: 5
volume: '267'
issue: Pt 1
pages: '131427'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 19
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- COVID-19
- SARS-CoV-2
- Neoplasms
- Pseudouridine
- COVID-19 Vaccines
- Animals
- mRNA Vaccines
- Pandemics
- Pneumonia, Viral
- Betacoronavirus
- Coronavirus Infections
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- mRNA-vaccine
cancer_types:
- melanoma
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- N1-methyl-pseudouridine
- m1Psi
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: RNA modifications and cancer
diseases_annotated:
- COVID-19
- COVID-19 disease
- cancer
- cancers
- infectious diseases
- melanoma
- metastasis
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 15
icite_rcr: 2.468869580043861
icite_percentile: 80.4
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Review: N1-methyl-pseudouridine (m1Ψ): Friend or foe of cancer?

## Abstract

Due to the health emergency created by SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes the COVID-19 disease, the rapid implementation of a new vaccine technology was necessary. mRNA vaccines, being one of the cutting-edge new technologies, attracted significant interest and offered a lot of hope. The potential of these vaccines in preventing admission to hospitals and serious illness in people with comorbidities has recently been called into question due to the vaccines' rapidly waning immunity. Mounting evidence indicates that these vaccines, like many others, do not generate sterilizing immunity, leaving people vulnerable to recurrent infections. Additionally, it has been discovered that the mRNA vaccines inhibit essential immunological pathways, thus impairing early interferon signaling. Within the framework of COVID-19 vaccination, this inhibition ensures an appropriate spike protein synthesis and a reduced immune activation. Evidence is provided that adding 100 % of N1-methyl-pseudouridine (m1Ψ) to the mRNA vaccine in a melanoma model stimulated cancer growth and metastasis, while non-modified mRNA vaccines induced opposite results, thus suggesting that COVID-19 mRNA vaccines could aid cancer development. Based on this compelling evidence, we suggest that future clinical trials for cancers or infectious diseases should not use mRNA vaccines with a 100 % m1Ψ modification, but rather ones with the lower percentage of m1Ψ modification to avoid immune suppression.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
