---
pmid: '38636560'
doi: 10.1016/j.arr.2024.102310
pmcid: ''
title: 'Aging as a loss of morphostatic information: A developmental bioelectricity
  perspective.'
authors:
- Pio-Lopez Léo
- Levin Michael
journal: Ageing research reviews
year: 2024
month: 6
volume: '97'
issue: ''
pages: '102310'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 26
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Humans
- Aging
- Electrophysiological Phenomena
- Homeostasis
- Longevity
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- bioelectric
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Planarian Biology and Electrostimulation
diseases_annotated:
- age-related diseases
- cancer
- organ malfunction
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 19
icite_rcr: 4.81184256205489
icite_percentile: 92.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Aging as a loss of morphostatic information: A developmental bioelectricity perspective.

## Abstract

Maintaining order at the tissue level is crucial throughout the lifespan, as failure can lead to cancer and an accumulation of molecular and cellular disorders. Perhaps, the most consistent and pervasive result of these failures is aging, which is characterized by the progressive loss of function and decline in the ability to maintain anatomical homeostasis and reproduce. This leads to organ malfunction, diseases, and ultimately death. The traditional understanding of aging is that it is caused by the accumulation of molecular and cellular damage. In this article, we propose a complementary view of aging from the perspective of endogenous bioelectricity which has not yet been integrated into aging research. We propose a view of aging as a morphostasis defect, a loss of biophysical prepattern information, encoding anatomical setpoints used for dynamic tissue and organ homeostasis. We hypothesize that this is specifically driven by abrogation of the endogenous bioelectric signaling that normally harnesses individual cell behaviors toward the creation and upkeep of complex multicellular structures in vivo. Herein, we first describe bioelectricity as the physiological software of life, and then identify and discuss the links between bioelectricity and life extension strategies and age-related diseases. We develop a bridge between aging and regeneration via bioelectric signaling that suggests a research program for healthful longevity via morphoceuticals. Finally, we discuss the broader implications of the homologies between development, aging, cancer and regeneration and how morphoceuticals can be developed for aging.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
