---
pmid: '38700060'
doi: 10.1002/smll.202402311
pmcid: ''
title: Tumor-On-A-Chip Models for Predicting In Vivo Nanoparticle Behavior.
authors:
- de Roode Kim E
- Hashemi Khadijeh
- Verdurmen Wouter P R
- Brock Roland
journal: Small (Weinheim an der Bergstrasse, Germany)
year: 2024
month: 8
volume: '20'
issue: '35'
pages: e2402311
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdfdirect/10.1002/smll.202402311
cited_by_count: 20
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Nanoparticles
- Tumor Microenvironment
- Neoplasms
- Lab-On-A-Chip Devices
- Animals
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: 3D Printing in Biomedical Research
diseases_annotated: []
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 13
icite_rcr: 2.51386972354941
icite_percentile: 80.8
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Tumor-On-A-Chip Models for Predicting In Vivo Nanoparticle Behavior.

## Abstract

Nanosized drug formulations are broadly explored for the improvement of cancer therapy. Prediction of in vivo nanoparticle (NP) behavior, however, is challenging, given the complexity of the tumor and its microenvironment. Microfluidic tumor-on-a-chip models are gaining popularity for the in vitro testing of nanoparticle targeting under conditions that simulate the 3D tumor (microenvironment). In this review, following a description of the tumor microenvironment (TME), the state of the art regarding tumor-on-a-chip models for investigating nanoparticle delivery to solid tumors is summarized. The models are classified based on the degree of compartmentalization (single/multi-compartment) and cell composition (tumor only/tumor microenvironment). The physiological relevance of the models is critically evaluated. Overall, microfluidic tumor-on-a-chip models greatly improve the simulation of the TME in comparison to 2D tissue cultures and static 3D spheroid models and contribute to the understanding of nanoparticle behavior. Interestingly, two interrelated aspects have received little attention so far which are the presence and potential impact of a protein corona as well as nanoparticle uptake through phagocytosing cells. A better understanding of their relevance for the predictive capacity of tumor-on-a-chip systems and development of best practices will be a next step for the further refinement of advanced in vitro tumor models.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
