---
pmid: '38769350'
doi: 10.1021/acsami.4c02651
pmcid: ''
title: Facile Synthesis of a Multifunctional Porous Organic Polymer Nanosonosensitizer
  (mHM@HMME) for Enhanced Cancer Sonodynamic Therapy.
authors:
- Li Meiting
- Liu Zhuoyin
- Tang Junjie
- Cheng LiLi
- Xue Yifan
- Liu Yadong
- Liu Jie
journal: ACS applied materials & interfaces
year: 2024
month: 6
volume: '16'
issue: '22'
pages: 28104-28117
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 11
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Mice
- Humans
- Porosity
- Ultrasonic Therapy
- Polymers
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Mice, Inbred BALB C
- Neoplasms
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Nanoparticles
- Reactive Oxygen Species
- Female
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
- sonodynamic
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes: []
drugs:
- HMME
- Organic Polymer
- disulfide
- glutathione
- mHM@HMME
- mitoxantrone
- organic polymer
- polymers
- reactive oxygen species
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated: []
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 5
icite_rcr: 0.9974615341752716
icite_percentile: 50.1
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Facile Synthesis of a Multifunctional Porous Organic Polymer Nanosonosensitizer (mHM@HMME) for Enhanced Cancer Sonodynamic Therapy.

## Abstract

Sonodynamic therapy (SDT), which involves the activation of sonosensitizers to generate cytotoxic reactive oxygen species under ultrasound irradiation, is a promising noninvasive modality for cancer treatment. However, the clinical translational application of SDT is impeded by the lack of efficient sonosensitizers, the inefficient accumulation of sonosensitizers at tumor sites, and the complicated immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment. Herein, we developed a facilely synthesized multifunctional porous organic polymer nanosonosensitizer (mHM@HMME) for enhanced SDT. Specifically, mHM@HMME nanosonosensitizers were prepared by incorporating chemotherapeutic mitoxantrone into the one-step synthesis process of disulfide bond containing porous organic polymers, followed by loading with organic sonosensitizer (HMME) and camouflaging with a cancer cell membrane. Due to the cancer cell membrane camouflage, this multifunctional mHM@HMME nanosonosensitizer showed prolonged blood circulation and tumor targeting aggregation. Under ultrasound irradiation, the mHM@HMME nanosonosensitizer exhibited a satisfactory SDT performance both in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, the potent SDT combined with glutathione-responsive drug release in tumor cells induced robust immunogenic cell death to enhance the antitumor effect of SDT in turn. Overall, this facilely synthesized multifunctional mHM@HMME nanosonosensitizer shows great potential application in enhanced SDT.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
