---
pmid: '38801591'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-57165-7_24
pmcid: ''
title: 'Application of Oncolytic Poxviruses: An Emerging Paradigm in Cancer Therapy.'
authors:
- Chakraborty Prasenjit
- Kumar Randhir
- Karn Sanjay
- Raviya Dharmiben D
- Mondal Priya
journal: Advances in experimental medicine and biology
year: 2024
month: null
volume: '1451'
issue: ''
pages: 369-381
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 2
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Oncolytic Virotherapy
- Neoplasms
- Oncolytic Viruses
- Animals
- Poxviridae
- Immunotherapy
- Vaccinia virus
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- oncolytic-virus
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Virus-based gene therapy research
diseases_annotated: []
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 2
icite_rcr: 0.31208196363204455
icite_percentile: 16.7
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Application of Oncolytic Poxviruses: An Emerging Paradigm in Cancer Therapy.

## Abstract

Despite the significant advancement of new tools and technology in the field of medical biology and molecular biology, the challenges in the treatment of most cancer types remain constant with the problem of developing resistance toward drugs and no substantial enhancement in the overall survival rate of cancer patients. Immunotherapy has shown the most promising results in different clinical and preclinical trials in the treatment of various cancer due to its higher efficacy and minimum collateral damage in many cancer patients as compared to conventional chemotherapy and radiotherapy. An oncolytic virus is a new class of immunotherapy that can selectively replicate in tumor cells and destroy them by the process of cell lysis while exerting minimum or no effect on a normal cell. Besides this, it can also activate the host's innate immune system, which generates an anti-tumor immune response to eliminate the tumor cells. Several wild types and genetically modified viruses have been investigated to show oncolytic behavior. Vaccinia virus has been studied extensively and tested for its promising oncolytic nature on various model systems and clinical trials. Recently, several engineered vaccinia viruses have been developed that express the desired genes encoded for selective penetration in tumor cells and enhanced activation of the immune system for generating anti-tumor immunity. However, further investigation is required to prove their potential and enhance their therapeutic efficacy.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
