---
pmid: '38869192'
doi: 10.1021/acsbiomaterials.4c00426
pmcid: ''
title: Noninvasive Transdermal Administration of mRNA Vaccines Encoding Multivalent
  Neoantigens Effectively Inhibits Melanoma Growth.
authors:
- Hou Yuting
- Wang Zhe
- Chen Zhen
- Shuai Lan
- Pei Yifei
- Sun Binbin
- Jiang Yuxin
- Wang Hongsheng
journal: ACS biomaterials science & engineering
year: 2024
month: 7
volume: '10'
issue: '7'
pages: 4587-4600
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 7
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Cancer Vaccines
- Administration, Cutaneous
- Mice
- mRNA Vaccines
- Antigens, Neoplasm
- Mice, Inbred C57BL
- Female
- Melanoma
- Chitosan
- Melanoma, Experimental
- Cell Line, Tumor
- RNA, Messenger
- Skin Neoplasms
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- mRNA-vaccine
cancer_types:
- melanoma
evidence_level: preclinical-invitro
genes:
- CD4
- CD8
- IFN-gamma
- IL-12
- PDL1
- TNF-alpha
drugs:
- EthsMC
- chitosan
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Immunotherapy and Immune Responses
diseases_annotated: []
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 6
icite_rcr: 1.318922958211768
icite_percentile: 60.5
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Noninvasive Transdermal Administration of mRNA Vaccines Encoding Multivalent Neoantigens Effectively Inhibits Melanoma Growth.

## Abstract

It is difficult to obtain specific tumor antigens, which is one of the main obstacles in the development of tumor vaccines. The vaccines containing multivalent antigens are thought to be more effective in antitumor therapy. In this study, a mRNA encoding three neoantigens of melanoma were prepared and encapsulated into the mannosylated chitosan-modified ethosomes (EthsMC) to obtain a multivalent mRNA vaccine (MmRV) for transcutaneous immunization (TCI). MmRV can effectively induce maturation of dendritic cells, with a better performance than mRNA of a single neoantigen. TCI patches (TCIPs) loading MmRV or siRNA against PDL1 (siPDL1) were prepared and applied to the skin of melanoma-bearing mice. The results showed that TCIPs significantly increase the levels of TNF-α, IFN-γ, and IL-12 in both plasma and tumor tissues, inhibit tumor growth, as well as promote infiltration of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in the tumor tissues. Furthermore, the combination of MmRV and siPDL1 showed much better antitumor effects than either monotherapy, suggesting a synergistic effect between the vaccine and PDL1 blocker. In addition, the treatment with the TCIPs did not cause damage to the skin, blood, and vital organs of the mice, showing good biosafety. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first to construct a noninvasive TCI system containing MmRV and siPDL1, providing a convenient and promising approach for tumor treatment.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
