---
pmid: '38866240'
doi: 10.1016/j.jtct.2024.06.006
pmcid: ''
title: 'Pediatric Cancer Immunotherapy and Potential for Impact on Fertility: A Need
  for Evidence-Based Guidance.'
authors:
- Ligon John A
- Cupit-Link Margaret C
- Yu Christine
- Levine Jennifer
- Foley Toni
- Rotz Seth
- Sharma Akshay
- Gomez-Lobo Veronica
- Shah Nirali N
journal: Transplantation and cellular therapy
year: 2024
month: 8
volume: '30'
issue: '8'
pages: 737-749
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 5
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Neoplasms
- Immunotherapy
- Fertility Preservation
- Child
- Fertility
- Adolescent
- Female
- Infertility
- Male
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- alkylating
- platin
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Reproductive Biology and Fertility
diseases_annotated: []
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 2
icite_rcr: 0.4454477700946736
icite_percentile: 24.3
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Pediatric Cancer Immunotherapy and Potential for Impact on Fertility: A Need for Evidence-Based Guidance.

## Abstract

The use of immunotherapies for the treatment of cancer in children, adolescents, and young adults has become common. As the use of immunotherapy has expanded, including in earlier lines of therapy, it has become evident that several aspects of how these immunotherapies impact longer-term outcomes among survivors are understudied. Traditional cancer therapies like alkylating and platin agents carry the greatest risk of infertility, but little is known about the impact of novel immunotherapies on fertility. This topic is of great interest to patients, patient advocates, and clinicians. In this article, we review immunotherapeutic agents used to treat childhood and young adult cancers and discuss potential mechanisms by which they may impact fertility based on the known interplay between the immune system and reproductive organs. We highlight the relative paucity of high-quality literature examining these late effects. We discuss interventions to optimize fertility preservation (FP) for our patients. Conducting longitudinal, collaborative, and prospective research on the fertility outcomes of pediatric and young adult patients with cancer who receive immunotherapy is critical to learn how to effectively counsel our patients on long-term fertility outcomes and indications for FP procedures. Collection of patient-level data will be necessary to draft evidence-based guidelines on which providers can make therapy recommendations.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
