---
pmid: '39009931'
doi: 10.1007/s13346-024-01669-9
pmcid: ''
title: 'Amelioration of breast cancer therapies through normalization of tumor vessels
  and microenvironment: paradigm shift to improve drug perfusion and nanocarrier permeation.'
authors:
- Famta Paras
- Shah Saurabh
- Vambhurkar Ganesh
- Pandey Giriraj
- Bagasariya Deepkumar
- Kumar Kondasingh Charan
- Prasad Sajja Bhanu
- Shinde Akshay
- Wagh Suraj
- Srinivasarao Dadi A
- Kumar Rahul
- Khatri Dharmendra Kumar
- Asthana Amit
- Srivastava Saurabh
journal: Drug delivery and translational research
year: 2025
month: 2
volume: '15'
issue: '2'
pages: 389-406
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 17
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Female
- Humans
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Breast Neoplasms
- Nanoparticles
- Neovascularization, Pathologic
- Tumor Microenvironment
- Nanoparticle Drug Delivery System
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Angiogenesis and VEGF in Cancer
diseases_annotated: []
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 10
icite_rcr: 5.000000001991686
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Amelioration of breast cancer therapies through normalization of tumor vessels and microenvironment: paradigm shift to improve drug perfusion and nanocarrier permeation.

## Abstract

Breast cancer (BC) is the most commonly diagnosed cancer among women. Chemo-, immune- and photothermal therapies are employed to manage BC. However, the tumor microenvironment (TME) prevents free drugs and nanocarriers (NCs) from entering the tumor premises. Formulation scientists rely on enhanced permeation and retention (EPR) to extravasate NCs in the TME. However, recent research has demonstrated the inconsistent nature of EPR among different patients and tumor types. In addition, angiogenesis, high intra-tumor fluid pressure, desmoplasia, and high cell and extracellular matrix density resist the accumulation of NCs in the TME. In this review, we discuss TME normalization as an approach to improve the penetration of drugs and NCSs in the tumor premises. Strategies such as normalization of tumor vessels, reversal of hypoxia, alleviation of high intra-tumor pressure, and infiltration of lymphocytes for the reversal of therapy failure have been discussed in this manuscript. Strategies to promote the infiltration of anticancer immune cells in the TME after vascular normalization have been discussed. Studies strategizing time points to administer TME-normalizing agents are highlighted. Mechanistic pathways controlling the angiogenesis and normalization processes are discussed along with the studies. This review will provide greater tumor-targeting insights to the formulation scientists.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
