---
pmid: '39034731'
doi: 10.2174/0113892010257212231001082741
pmcid: ''
title: 'FDA-approved CAR T-cell Therapy: A Decade of Progress and Challenges.'
authors:
- Ong Melissa Z
- Kimberly Sharon A
- Lee Wen-Hwei
- Ling Marcus
- Lee Michael
- Tan Ke-Wei
- Foo Jhi-Biau
- Yow Hui-Yin
- Sellappans Renukha
- Hamzah Sharina
journal: Current pharmaceutical biotechnology
year: 2024
month: null
volume: '25'
issue: '11'
pages: 1377-1393
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 17
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Immunotherapy, Adoptive
- Neoplasms
- Receptors, Chimeric Antigen
- United States Food and Drug Administration
- United States
- T-Lymphocytes
- Animals
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- car-t
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- CAR
drugs:
- lisocabtagene maraleucel
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: CAR-T cell therapy research
diseases_annotated: []
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 14
icite_rcr: 2.4737038072221433
icite_percentile: 80.4
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# FDA-approved CAR T-cell Therapy: A Decade of Progress and Challenges.

## Abstract

CAR T-cell therapy is a promising approach for cancer treatment, utilizing a patient's own T-cells (autologous cell) or T-cells from a healthy donor (allogeneic cell) to target and destroy cancer cells. Over the last decade, significant advancements have been made in this field, including the development of novel CAR constructs, improved understanding of biology and mechanisms of action, and expanded clinical applications for treating a wider range of cancers. In this review, we provide an overview of the steps involved in the production of CAR T-cells and their mechanism of action. We also introduce different CAR T-cell therapies available, including their implementation, dosage, administration, treatment cost, efficacy, and resistance. Common side effects of CAR T-cell therapy are also discussed. The CAR T-cell products highlighted in this review are FDA-approved products, which include Kymriah® (tisagenlecleucel), Tecartus® (brexucabtagene autoleucel), Abecma® (Idecabtagene vicleucel), Breyanzi® (lisocabtagene maraleucel), and Yescarta® (axicabtagene ciloleucel). In conclusion, CAR T-cell therapy has made tremendous progress over the past decade and has the potential to revolutionize cancer treatment. This review paper provides insights into the progress, challenges, and future directions of CAR T-cell therapy, offering valuable information for researchers, clinicians, and patients.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
