---
pmid: '39032951'
doi: 10.1016/bs.acr.2024.05.007
pmcid: ''
title: Epigenetic regulation of androgen dependent and independent prostate cancer.
authors:
- Mishra Jagdish
- Chakraborty Subhajit
- Nandi Piyasa
- Manna Soumen
- Baral Tirthankar
- Niharika
- Roy Ankan
- Mishra Prahallad
- Patra Samir Kumar
journal: Advances in cancer research
year: 2024
month: null
volume: '161'
issue: ''
pages: 223-320
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 1
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Male
- Epigenesis, Genetic
- Prostatic Neoplasms
- Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic
- DNA Methylation
- Androgens
- Animals
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms: []
cancer_types:
- prostate
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Epigenetics and DNA Methylation
diseases_annotated: []
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 1
icite_rcr: 0.1864553602447296
icite_percentile: 9.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Epigenetic regulation of androgen dependent and independent prostate cancer.

## Abstract

Prostate cancer is one of the most common malignancies among men worldwide. Besides genetic alterations, epigenetic modulations including DNA methylation, histone modifications and miRNA mediated alteration of gene expression are the key driving forces for the prostate tumor development and cancer progression. Aberrant expression and/or the activity of the epigenetic modifiers/enzymes, results in aberrant expression of genes involved in DNA repair, cell cycle regulation, cell adhesion, apoptosis, autophagy, tumor suppression and hormone response and thereby disease progression. Altered epigenome is associated with prostate cancer recurrence, progression, aggressiveness and transition from androgen-dependent to androgen-independent phenotype. These epigenetic modifications are reversible and various compounds/drugs targeting the epigenetic enzymes have been developed that are effective in cancer treatment. This chapter focuses on the epigenetic alterations in prostate cancer initiation and progression, listing different epigenetic biomarkers for diagnosis and prognosis of the disease and their potential as therapeutic targets. This chapter also summarizes different epigenetic drugs approved for prostate cancer therapy and the drugs available for clinical trials.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
