---
pmid: '39047499'
doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2024.103734
pmcid: PMC11330346
title: Regulation, functional impact, and therapeutic targeting of APOBEC3A in cancer.
authors:
- Kawale Ajinkya S
- Zou Lee
journal: DNA repair
year: 2024
month: 9
volume: '141'
issue: ''
pages: '103734'
is_oa: true
oa_status: green
oa_url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11330346/pdf/nihms-2013866.pdf
cited_by_count: 4
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Neoplasms
- Cytidine Deaminase
- Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic
- Animals
- Proteins
- DNA Damage
- Mutagenesis
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
mechanisms: []
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- A3A
- A3B
- APOBEC3A
- APOBEC3B
drugs:
- cytosine
- uracil
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: RNA modifications and cancer
diseases_annotated: []
mutations:
- A3A
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 3
icite_rcr: 0.7577059842317804
icite_percentile: 40.3
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Regulation, functional impact, and therapeutic targeting of APOBEC3A in cancer.

## Abstract

Enzymes of the apolipoprotein B mRNA editing catalytic polypeptide like (APOBEC) family are cytosine deaminases that convert cytosine to uracil in DNA and RNA. Among these proteins, APOBEC3 sub-family members, APOBEC3A (A3A) and APOBEC3B (A3B), are prominent sources of mutagenesis in cancer cells. The aberrant expression of A3A and A3B in cancer cells leads to accumulation of mutations with specific single-base substitution (SBS) signatures, characterized by C→T and C→G changes, in a number of tumor types. In addition to fueling mutagenesis, A3A and A3B, particularly A3A, induce DNA replication stress, DNA damage, and chromosomal instability through their catalytic activities, triggering a range of cellular responses. Thus, A3A/B have emerged as key drivers of genome evolution during cancer development, contributing to tumorigenesis, tumor heterogeneity, and therapeutic resistance. Yet, the expression of A3A/B in cancer cells presents a cancer vulnerability that can be exploited therapeutically. In this review, we discuss the recent studies that shed light on the mechanisms regulating A3A expression and the impact of A3A in cancer. We also review recent advances in the development of A3A inhibitors and provide perspectives on the future directions of A3A research.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
