---
pmid: '39101839'
doi: 10.1080/08982104.2024.2385457
pmcid: ''
title: 'Precision-engineered PEGylated liposome for dual payload delivery: enhancing
  efficacy of Doxorubicin hydrochloride and miR-145 mimics in breast cancer cells.'
authors:
- Ng Chu Xin
- How Chee Wun
- Lee Sau Har
journal: Journal of liposome research
year: 2025
month: 3
volume: '35'
issue: '1'
pages: 15-28
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 4
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Doxorubicin
- Polyethylene Glycols
- MicroRNAs
- Liposomes
- Breast Neoplasms
- Female
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Particle Size
- Drug Liberation
- Cell Proliferation
- Nanoparticles
- Antibiotics, Antineoplastic
- Drug Delivery Systems
- Cell Survival
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: preclinical-invitro
genes:
- miR-145
drugs:
- Dox- HCl
- Dox-HCl
- Doxorubicin hydrochloride
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoparticle-Based Drug Delivery
diseases_annotated: []
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 1
icite_rcr: null
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Precision-engineered PEGylated liposome for dual payload delivery: enhancing efficacy of Doxorubicin hydrochloride and miR-145 mimics in breast cancer cells.

## Abstract

Micro-145 down-regulation is frequently found in breast cancers, indicating its potential as a therapeutic target. The introduction of exogenous miR-145 directly to the tumor sites has been a hurdle due to limited delivery, low bioavailability, and hence lower therapeutic efficacy. Thus, this study aims to synthesize and characterize PEGylated liposome co-loaded with Dox-HCl and miR-145 mimics to investigate its in-vitro anti-proliferative activity against MDA-MB-231 cells. The formulations were developed using a composite central design to optimize nanoparticle size and encapsulation efficiency (EE%) of Dox-HCl and miR-145 mimics. The optimized formulation exhibited the highest desirability function (D = 0.814) and displayed excellent stability over 60 days at 4 °C, maintaining a stable nanoparticle size and zeta potential, with relative EE% of Dox-HCl and miR-145 mimics on the final incubation day 94.97 ± 0.53% and 51.96 ± 2.67%, respectively. The system displayed a higher rate of drug release within 4 h of incubation at an acidic condition. Additionally, the optimized formulation demonstrated a higher toxicity (IC50 = 0.58 μM) against MDA-MB-231 cells than the free Dox- HCl and miR-145 regimen (IC50 = 1.00 μM). Our findings suggest that PEGylated liposome is tunable for effective concurrent delivery of anticancer drugs and therapeutic miRNAs into tumor cells, necessitating further investigation.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
