---
pmid: '39121719'
doi: 10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2024.113003
pmcid: ''
title: Blue light photobiomodulation induced osteosarcoma cell death by facilitating
  ferroptosis and eliciting an incomplete tumor cell stress response.
authors:
- Yang Jiali
- Fu Qiqi
- Jiang Hui
- Zhong Hongyu
- Qin Hao Kuan
- Miao Xiaojing
- Li Yinghua
- Liu Muqing
- Yao Jinghui
journal: Journal of photochemistry and photobiology. B, Biology
year: 2024
month: 9
volume: '258'
issue: ''
pages: '113003'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 6
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Apoptosis
- Blue Light
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Cell Survival
- Ferroptosis
- Iron
- Low-Level Light Therapy
- Membrane Potential, Mitochondrial
- Osteosarcoma
- Oxidative Stress
- Reactive Oxygen Species
- Bone Neoplasms
pub_types:
- Evaluation Study
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- bioelectric
cancer_types:
- sarcoma
evidence_level: preclinical-invitro
genes: []
drugs:
- ROS
- iron
- reactive oxygen species
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Laser Applications in Dentistry and Medicine
diseases_annotated: []
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 5
icite_rcr: 1.0966865930484253
icite_percentile: 53.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Blue light photobiomodulation induced osteosarcoma cell death by facilitating ferroptosis and eliciting an incomplete tumor cell stress response.

## Abstract

To investigate the potential of blue light photobiomodulation (PBM) in inducing ferroptosis, a novel form of regulated cell death, in OS cells, considering its known effectiveness in various cancer models. In this investigation, we exposed human OS cell lines, HOS and MG63, to different wavelengths (420, 460 and 480 nm) of blue light at varying irradiances, and examined cellular responses such as viability, apoptosis, levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS), and mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP). Transcriptome sequencing was employed to unravel the molecular mechanisms underlying blue light-induced effects, with validation via quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Our findings revealed a wavelength- and time-dependent decrease in cell viability, accompanied by increased apoptosis and oxidative stress. Transcriptomic analysis identified differential expression of genes associated with ferroptosis, oxidative stress, and iron metabolism, further validated by qRT-PCR. These results implicated ferroptosis as a significant mechanism in the blue light-induced death of OS cells, potentially mediated by ROS generation and disruption of iron homeostasis. Also, An incomplete stress response was observed in MG63 cells induced by blue light exposure. Hence, blue light PBM holds promise as a therapeutic approach in OS clinical investigations; however, additional exploration of its underlying mechanisms remains imperative.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
