---
pmid: '39180380'
doi: 10.1002/med.22069
pmcid: ''
title: The recent advance and prospect of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors for
  the treatment of cancer.
authors:
- Bai Yi-Ru
- Yang Wei-Guang
- Jia Rui
- Sun Ju-Shan
- Shen Dan-Dan
- Liu Hong-Min
- Yuan Shuo
journal: Medicinal research reviews
year: 2025
month: 1
volume: '45'
issue: '1'
pages: 214-273
is_oa: true
oa_status: bronze
oa_url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdfdirect/10.1002/med.22069
cited_by_count: 15
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors
- Neoplasms
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Drug Resistance, Neoplasm
- Animals
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- synthetic-lethality
cancer_types:
- breast
- ovarian
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- PARP
- Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
- poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: PARP inhibition in cancer therapy
diseases_annotated:
- breast cancer
- cancer
- cancers
- multidrug resistance
- ovarian cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 17
icite_rcr: 8.499971158959369
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# The recent advance and prospect of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors for the treatment of cancer.

## Abstract

Chemotherapies are commonly used in cancer therapy, their applications are limited to low specificity, severe adverse reactions, and long-term medication-induced drug resistance. Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors are a novel class of antitumor drugs developed to solve these intractable problems based on the mechanism of DNA damage repair, which have been widely applied in the treatment of ovarian cancer, breast cancer, and other cancers through inducing synthetic lethal effect and trapping PARP-DNA complex in BRCA gene mutated cancer cells. In recent years, PARP inhibitors have been widely used in combination with various first-line chemotherapy drugs, targeted drugs and immune checkpoint inhibitors to expand the scope of clinical application. However, the intricate mechanisms underlying the drug resistance to PARP inhibitors, including the restoration of homologous recombination, stabilization of DNA replication forks, overexpression of drug efflux protein, and epigenetic modifications pose great challenges and desirability in the development of novel PARP inhibitors. In this review, we will focus on the mechanism, structure-activity relationship, and multidrug resistance associated with the representative PARP inhibitors. Furthermore, we aim to provide insights into the development prospects and emerging trends to offer guidance for the clinical application and inspiration for the development of novel PARP inhibitors and degraders.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
