---
pmid: '39228116'
doi: 10.1002/rmv.2580
pmcid: ''
title: Merkel Cell Polyomavirus-Pathophysiology and Treatment in the Era of Gene-Targeted
  Therapies.
authors:
- Chokwassanasakulkit Trairong
- McMillan Nigel A J
journal: Reviews in medical virology
year: 2024
month: 9
volume: '34'
issue: '5'
pages: e2580
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1002/rmv.2580
cited_by_count: 8
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Merkel cell polyomavirus
- Carcinoma, Merkel Cell
- Polyomavirus Infections
- Genetic Therapy
- Skin Neoplasms
- Animals
- Tumor Virus Infections
- RNA, Small Interfering
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- crispr
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Polyomavirus and related diseases
diseases_annotated:
- MCC
- Merkel Cell Polyomavirus
- Merkel cell carcinoma
- metastasis
- skin cancer
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 7
icite_rcr: 1.5349701278776986
icite_percentile: 65.8
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Merkel Cell Polyomavirus-Pathophysiology and Treatment in the Era of Gene-Targeted Therapies.

## Abstract

Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV) is a significant contributor to the development of Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC), an aggressive skin cancer with high recurrence and a low survival rate. In fact, it is the deadliest skin cancer. The precise routes of transmission for MCPyV-positive MCC remain unclear, but several factors may trigger its development. Conventional treatments for MCC are not highly effective, especially in patients with metastasis, with a clear need for new treatment options. Gene-targeted therapies hold great promise for the treatment of MCC, including the use of siRNA and CRISPR/Cas (C/Cas) but critically none have yet been translated into clinical trials. Validating this approach is the fact that several siRNA products are already FDA licenced, while C/Cas has entered clinical trial, albeit for conditions other than MCC. There are many challenges that must be overcome to move from preclinical research to the clinic. In this review, we provide a comprehensive summary of the current understanding of MCC, with a particular focus on MCPyV-positive MCC, and the status of gene-targeted therapies. Additionally, we discuss the major obstacles that impede MCC research and explore future prospects.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
