---
pmid: '39259979'
doi: 10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-061124-102218
pmcid: ''
title: Gut Microbiota-Related Biomarkers in Immuno-Oncology.
authors:
- Silva Carolina Alves Costa
- Fidelle Marine
- Almonte Andrew A
- Derosa Lisa
- Zitvogel Laurence
journal: Annual review of pharmacology and toxicology
year: 2025
month: 1
volume: '65'
issue: '1'
pages: 333-354
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-061124-102218
cited_by_count: 15
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome
- Neoplasms
- Immunotherapy
- Dysbiosis
- Animals
- Biomarkers
- Biomarkers, Tumor
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Gut microbiota and health
diseases_annotated:
- Carcinogenesis
- cancer
- dysbiosis
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 15
icite_rcr: 7.500000002987529
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.95
icite_enriched: true
---

# Gut Microbiota-Related Biomarkers in Immuno-Oncology.

## Abstract

Carcinogenesis is associated with the emergence of protracted intestinal dysbiosis and metabolic changes. Increasing evidence shows that gut microbiota-related biomarkers and microbiota-centered interventions are promising strategies to overcome resistance to immunotherapy. However, current standard methods for evaluating gut microbiota composition are cost- and time-consuming. The development of routine diagnostic tools for intestinal barrier alterations and dysbiosis constitutes a critical unmet medical need that can guide routine treatment and microbiota-centered intervention decisions in patients with cancer. In this review, we explore the influence of gut microbiota on cancer immunotherapy and highlight gut-associated biomarkers that have the potential to be transformed into simple diagnostic tools, thus guiding standard treatment decisions in the field of immuno-oncology. Mechanistic insights toward leveraging the complex relationship between cancer immunosurveillance, gut microbiota, and metabolism open exciting opportunities for developing novel biomarkers in immuno-oncology.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
