---
pmid: '39305018'
doi: 10.1080/14728222.2024.2405090
pmcid: ''
title: Combined cancer immunotherapy based on targeting adenosine pathway and PD-1/PDL-1
  axis.
authors:
- Fathi Mehrdad
- Zarei Asieh
- Moghimi Ata
- Jalali Pooya
- Salehi Zahra
- Gholamin Sharareh
- Jadidi-Niaragh Farhad
journal: Expert opinion on therapeutic targets
year: 2024
month: 9
volume: '28'
issue: '9'
pages: 757-777
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 4
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Neoplasms
- Adenosine
- Animals
- Immunotherapy
- Programmed Cell Death 1 Receptor
- Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors
- B7-H1 Antigen
- Signal Transduction
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- PD-1
- PDL-1
drugs:
- Adenosine
- adenosine
- purine nucleoside
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Adenosine and Purinergic Signaling
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- Tumor
- cancer
- malignancies
- malignant tumors
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 4
icite_rcr: 0.5805572983653312
icite_percentile: 31.6
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Combined cancer immunotherapy based on targeting adenosine pathway and PD-1/PDL-1 axis.

## Abstract

**INTRODUCTION**: Cancer immunotherapy has revolutionized the field of oncology, offering new hope to patients with advanced malignancies. Tumor-induced immunosuppression limits the effectiveness of current immunotherapeutic strategies, such as PD-1/PDL-1 checkpoint inhibitors. Adenosine, a purine nucleoside molecule, is crucial to this immunosuppression because it stops T cells from activating and helps regulatory T cells grow. Targeting the adenosine pathway and blocking PD-1/PDL-1 is a potential way to boost the immune system's response to tumors.

**AREAS COVERED**: This review discusses the current understanding of the adenosine pathway in tumor immunology and the preclinical and clinical data supporting the combination of adenosine pathway inhibitors with PD-1/PDL-1 blockade. We also discuss the challenges and future directions for developing combination immunotherapy targeting the adenosine pathway and the PD-1/PDL-1 axis for cancer treatment.

**EXPERT OPINION**: The fact that the adenosine signaling pathway controls many immune system processes suggests that it has a wide range of therapeutic uses. Within the next five years, there will be tremendous progress in this area, and the standard of care for treating malignant tumors will have switched from point-to-point therapy to the integration of immunological networks comprised of multiple signaling pathways, like the adenosine axis.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
