---
pmid: '39520520'
doi: 10.1007/s11864-024-01277-2
pmcid: ''
title: Updates in Treatment of HER2-positive Metastatic Breast Cancer.
authors:
- Avelino Alzira R M
- Pulipati Soumya
- Jamouss Kevin
- Bhardwaj Prarthna V
journal: Current treatment options in oncology
year: 2024
month: 12
volume: '25'
issue: '12'
pages: 1471-1481
is_oa: true
oa_status: bronze
oa_url: https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s11864-024-01277-2.pdf
cited_by_count: 13
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Breast Neoplasms
- Female
- Erb-b2 Receptor Tyrosine Kinases
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- Treatment Outcome
- Disease Management
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- Biomarkers, Tumor
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- antibody-drug-conjugate
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- HER2
- PD-L1
drugs:
- Tucatinib
- capecitabine
- taxane
- trastuzumab
- trastuzumab deruxtecan
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: HER2/EGFR in Cancer Research
diseases_annotated:
- Breast Cancer
- Metastatic
- OPINION
- brain
- breast cancer
- metastases
- metastatic
- toxicity
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 11
icite_rcr: 1.6937295180025618
icite_percentile: 69.2
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Updates in Treatment of HER2-positive Metastatic Breast Cancer.

## Abstract

The therapeutic landscape for HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer has exploded in the last two decades following the initial advent of trastuzumab, a monoclonal antibody. While the first line treatment has remained a combination of dual HER2 blockade with taxane chemotherapy, we now have several exciting options in the second line and beyond. The introduction of antibody-drug conjugates, in specific trastuzumab deruxtecan, has resulted in the best progression-free survival among patients with this subtype of breast cancer. Given the excellent outcomes of these drugs, clinical trials are now evaluating the role of ADCs in the front-line setting in previously untreated patients. In addition, there are also clinical trials evaluating the role of other targets in patients with HER2-positive cancers, including PI3KCA mutations, PD-L1 and CDK4/6. Given the predilection for brain metastases in this population, there is enthusiasm to identify the optimal combination of effective treatments. Tucatinib, capecitabine, and trastuzumab combination represent one such promising strategy. With the increasing longevity of these patients, important clinical questions include optimal treatment sequencing, the role of de-escalation of treatment in excellent responders, and the associated financial toxicity. Despite the aggressive nature of this subtype of breast cancer, the outcomes continue to improve for these patients with the evolving treatments.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
