---
pmid: '39638158'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2024.189233
pmcid: ''
title: 'Unveiling the potential of gene editing techniques in revolutionizing Cancer
  treatment: A comprehensive overview.'
authors:
- Garg Pankaj
- Singhal Gargi
- Pareek Siddhika
- Kulkarni Prakash
- Horne David
- Nath Aritro
- Salgia Ravi
- Singhal Sharad S
journal: Biochimica et biophysica acta. Reviews on cancer
year: 2025
month: 2
volume: '1880'
issue: '1'
pages: '189233'
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbcan.2024.189233
cited_by_count: 17
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Gene Editing
- Neoplasms
- CRISPR-Cas Systems
- Genetic Therapy
- Precision Medicine
- Animals
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
mechanisms:
- crispr
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: CRISPR and Genetic Engineering
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- cancer
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 17
icite_rcr: 8.500000003385866
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.5
icite_enriched: true
---

# Unveiling the potential of gene editing techniques in revolutionizing Cancer treatment: A comprehensive overview.

## Abstract

Gene editing techniques have emerged as powerful tools in biomedical research, offering precise manipulation of genetic material with the potential to revolutionize cancer treatment strategies. This review provides a comprehensive overview of the current landscape of gene editing technologies, including CRISPR-Cas systems, base editing, prime editing, and synthetic gene circuits, highlighting their applications and potential in cancer therapy. It discusses the mechanisms, advantages, and limitations of each gene editing approach, emphasizing their transformative impact on targeting oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, and drug resistance mechanisms in various cancer types. The review delves into population-level interventions and precision prevention strategies enabled by gene editing technologies, including gene drives, synthetic gene circuits, and precision prevention tools, for controlling cancer-causing genes, targeting pre-cancerous lesions, and implementing personalized preventive measures. Ethical considerations, regulatory challenges, and future directions in gene editing research for cancer treatment are also addressed. This review highlights how gene editing could revolutionize precision medicine by enhancing patient care and advancing cancer treatments with targeted, personalized methods. For these benefits to be fully realized, collaboration among researchers, doctors, regulators, and patient advocates is crucial in fighting cancer and meeting clinical needs.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
