---
pmid: '39645062'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2024.125050
pmcid: ''
title: 'Intelligent responsive nanogels: New Horizons in cancer therapy.'
authors:
- Musa MiriGuli
- Sun Xinxin
- Shi Jianbin
- Li Jing
- Zhang Shenwu
- Shi Xianbao
journal: International journal of pharmaceutics
year: 2025
month: 1
volume: '669'
issue: ''
pages: '125050'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 11
mesh_terms:
- Animals
- Humans
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Drug Liberation
- Hydrogen-Ion Concentration
- Nanogels
- Nanoparticle Drug Delivery System
- Neoplasms
- Reactive Oxygen Species
- Smart Materials
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- GSH
- ROS
- glutathione
- reactive oxygen species
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoparticle-Based Drug Delivery
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- hypoxia
- toxicity
- tumor
- tumors
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 8
icite_rcr: 4.0000000015933495
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Intelligent responsive nanogels: New Horizons in cancer therapy.

## Abstract

Biologically engineered nanogels formed through sophisticated intramolecular crosslinking processes represent the forefront of next-generation drug delivery systems. These innovative systems offer many advantages, like adjustable size, satisfactory biocompatibility, and minimal toxicity. Their unique attributes facilitate deep penetration and long-term retention of drugs in tumors, effectively enhancing the anti-tumor effects. Nonetheless, the rapid disintegration of nanogels and the subsequent triggering of drug release at the tumor site pose significant challenges in achieving more effective and precise tumor treatments. Therefore, increasing research has been dedicated to exploring stimulus-responsive nanogels for enhancing tumor therapy. This review aims to encapsulate the research advancements in emerging stimulus-responsive antitumor nanogels. Firstly, a detailed exposition is provided on various endogenous stimulus-responsive nanogels, encompassing factors such as pH, hypoxia, enzymes, reactive oxygen species (ROS), and glutathione (GSH). Secondly, various nanogels triggered by exogenous stimuli such as light, ultrasound, temperature, and magnetic fields are elaborately presented. Furthermore, nanogels with multifaceted stimulus-responsive properties are also skillfully designed. Finally, the future directions, application prospects, and challenges of intelligent responsive nanogels in cancer treatment are highlighted.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
