---
pmid: '39951340'
doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.4c00546
pmcid: ''
title: Chemical Design of Magnetic Nanomaterials for Imaging and Ferroptosis-Based
  Cancer Therapy.
authors:
- Xu Wei
- Guan Guoqiang
- Yue Renye
- Dong Zhe
- Lei Lingling
- Kang Heemin
- Song Guosheng
journal: Chemical reviews
year: 2025
month: 2
volume: '125'
issue: '4'
pages: 1897-1961
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 58
mesh_terms:
- Ferroptosis
- Humans
- Neoplasms
- Animals
- Magnetite Nanoparticles
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Nanomedicine
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- immunotherapy
- nanoparticle
- sonodynamic
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- iron
- lipid
- peroxide
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoplatforms for cancer theranostics
diseases_annotated:
- Cancer
- Ferroptosis
- cancer
- cancers
- ferroptosis
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 35
icite_rcr: 17.5000000069709
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.75
icite_enriched: true
---

# Chemical Design of Magnetic Nanomaterials for Imaging and Ferroptosis-Based Cancer Therapy.

## Abstract

Ferroptosis, an iron-dependent form of regulatory cell death, has garnered significant interest as a therapeutic target in cancer treatment due to its distinct characteristics, including lipid peroxide generation and redox imbalance. However, its clinical application in oncology is currently limited by issues such as suboptimal efficacy and potential off-target effects. The advent of nanotechnology has provided a new way for overcoming these challenges through the development of activatable magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs). These innovative MNPs are designed to improve the specificity and efficacy of ferroptosis induction. This Review delves into the chemical and biological principles guiding the design of MNPs for ferroptosis-based cancer therapies and imaging-guided therapies. It discusses the regulatory mechanisms and biological attributes of ferroptosis, the chemical composition of MNPs, their mechanism of action as ferroptosis inducers, and their integration with advanced imaging techniques for therapeutic monitoring. Additionally, we examine the convergence of ferroptosis with other therapeutic strategies, including chemodynamic therapy, photothermal therapy, photodynamic therapy, sonodynamic therapy, and immunotherapy, within the context of nanomedicine strategies utilizing MNPs. This Review highlights the potential of these multifunctional MNPs to surpass the limitations of conventional treatments, envisioning a future of drug-resistance-free, precision diagnostics and ferroptosis-based therapies for treating recalcitrant cancers.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
