---
pmid: '39989260'
doi: 10.1002/biot.202400596
pmcid: ''
title: 'mRNA Vaccines: Design Principles, Mechanisms, and Manufacturing-Insights From
  COVID-19 as a Model for Combating Infectious Diseases.'
authors:
- Khorshid Sokhangouy Saeideh
- Behzadi Matine
- Rezaei Shokuh
- Farjami Mahsa
- Haghshenas Maryam
- Sefidbakht Yahya
- Mozaffari-Jovin Sina
journal: Biotechnology journal
year: 2025
month: 2
volume: '20'
issue: '2'
pages: e202400596
is_oa: true
oa_status: bronze
oa_url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdfdirect/10.1002/biot.202400596
cited_by_count: 5
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- COVID-19
- COVID-19 Vaccines
- SARS-CoV-2
- mRNA Vaccines
- Vaccines, Synthetic
- RNA, Messenger
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- mRNA-vaccine
- nanoparticle
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- lipid
- nucleotides
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: RNA Interference and Gene Delivery
diseases_annotated:
- COVID-19
- Infectious Diseases
- cancer
- infectious diseases
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 4
icite_rcr: null
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# mRNA Vaccines: Design Principles, Mechanisms, and Manufacturing-Insights From COVID-19 as a Model for Combating Infectious Diseases.

## Abstract

The full approval of two SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccines, Comirnaty and Spikevax, has greatly accelerated the development of numerous mRNA vaccine candidates targeting infectious diseases and cancer. mRNA vaccines provide a rapid, safe, and versatile manufacturing process while eliciting strong humoral and cellular immune responses, making them particularly beneficial for addressing emerging pandemics. Recent advancements in modified nucleotides and lipid nanoparticle delivery systems have further emphasized the potential of this vaccine platform. Despite these transformative opportunities, significant improvements are needed to enhance vaccine efficacy, stability, and immunogenicity. This review outlines the fundamentals of mRNA vaccine design, the manufacturing process, and administration strategies, along with various optimization approaches. It also offers a comprehensive overview of the mRNA vaccine candidates developed since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the challenges posed by emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants, and current strategies to address these variants. Finally, we discuss the potential of broad-spectrum and combined mRNA vaccines and examine the challenges and future prospects of the mRNA vaccine platform.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
