---
pmid: '40105672'
doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-24-0928
pmcid: ''
title: Coinhibition of Aurora Kinase B and SUV4-20H Induces Synthetic Lethality in
  Wild-type p53-Deficient Cancer Cells.
authors:
- Duan Lei
- O'Hara Kelsey M
- Caldemeyer Andrew
- Maki Carl G
journal: Molecular cancer therapeutics
year: 2025
month: 7
volume: '24'
issue: '7'
pages: 1020-1029
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 3
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Aurora Kinase B
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53
- Cell Line, Tumor
- Synthetic Lethal Mutations
- Animals
- Mice
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
- Cell Proliferation
- Female
- Organophosphates
- Neoplasms
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- synthetic-lethality
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: preclinical-invivo
genes:
- AURKB
- Aurora B
- Aurora kinase B
- p53
drugs:
- A196
- AZD2811
- Barasertib
- barasertib
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Cancer-related Molecular Pathways
diseases_annotated:
- TNBCs
- aneuploidy
- breast cancer
- cancer
- cancers
- deficient
- tumor
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 1
icite_rcr: null
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Coinhibition of Aurora Kinase B and SUV4-20H Induces Synthetic Lethality in Wild-type p53-Deficient Cancer Cells.

## Abstract

The tumor suppressor p53 is inactivated by mutation or deletion in more than half of all human cancers. Wild-type p53 induces a G1-phase arrest when activated to halt cell proliferation and division. Accordingly, p53-mutated or -deficient cancers may be especially sensitive to agents that target proliferating and/or dividing cells. Barasertib (AZD2811) targets the mitotic Aurora kinase B and is in current clinical trials for various cancers. SUV4-20H1 and H2 are histone methyltransferases that can affect mitosis by regulating chromatin compaction in and around centromeres. The drug A196 inhibits SUV4-20H1 and H2. In the current study, we found combined treatment with barasertib plus A196 induces a pronounced synthetic lethality effect in p53-deficient cancer cells. Mechanistically, we found barasertib plus A196 kills p53-deficient cells by inhibiting the spindle assembly checkpoint and inducing massive chromosome missegregations and toxic aneuploidy. Among breast cancer subtypes, triple-negative breast cancer cells were the most sensitive to this drug combination. Lastly, we found in two different p53-mutated cell line tumor models that barasertib plus A196 has greater antitumor activity than either single agent. Our results suggest cotargeting of Aurora kinase B and SUV4-20H1/2 could be effective against p53-mutated or -deficient cancers, including triple-negative breast cancers in which approximately 80% of cases are p53-mutated.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
