---
pmid: '40134106'
doi: 10.1080/20415990.2025.2484170
pmcid: PMC12140494
title: Engineered nanoparticles as a promising drug delivery system for glioblastoma
  multiforme treatment.
authors:
- Zarneshan Seyede Nazanin
- Aghaz Faranak
journal: Therapeutic delivery
year: 2025
month: 6
volume: '16'
issue: '6'
pages: 593-606
is_oa: true
oa_status: green
oa_url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12140494/
cited_by_count: 6
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Glioblastoma
- Brain Neoplasms
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Animals
- Nanoparticles
- Drug Delivery Systems
- Nanoparticle Drug Delivery System
- Blood-Brain Barrier
- Drug Carriers
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types:
- glioblastoma
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs:
- BBTB
- ENP
- doxorubicin
- lipid
- paclitaxel
- temozolomide
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoparticle-Based Drug Delivery
diseases_annotated:
- Brain cancer
- GBM
- cancer
- glioblastoma
- toxicity
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 4
icite_rcr: null
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.25
icite_enriched: true
---

# Engineered nanoparticles as a promising drug delivery system for glioblastoma multiforme treatment.

## Abstract

Brain cancer has become an emerging medical disorder that poses a threat to human life due to the uncontrolled growth of cancer cells and their gradual spread to other organs. The most aggressive and life-threatening of the several types of Brain cancer is GBM. Treating GBM is difficult considering drugs are not exposed at the brain's site of action because of BBTB and BBB. Only a few cytotoxic drugs are presently used to treat GBM, including temozolomide, paclitaxel, and doxorubicin, and only temozolomide has enough BBB penetration. In this context, engineered nanoparticles are used to transport chemotherapeutic medications and reduce notable peripheral toxicity on normal cells; for necessary drug dosages. They are investigated as drug carriers to address the problem of drug resistance linked to traditional chemotherapy treatments. Many nanostructures, such as polymeric, lipid-based, and inorganic nanoparticles, have been developed as drug-delivery methods in recent decades. To be therapeutically successful as a GBM therapy, ENP formulations must diffuse through the BBB and efficiently deliver the drugs to the target cells. Various coatings and surface modifications of nanostructures can be tailored with different targeting moieties to facilitate the uptake of drug carriers by malignant cells while safeguarding healthy tissues from damage.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
