---
pmid: '40167629'
doi: 10.1007/s00210-025-04012-2
pmcid: ''
title: 'Innovative approaches in breast cancer therapy: repurposing nanocarriers for
  enhanced outcomes.'
authors:
- Siddiqui Sana Naaz
- Haider Md Faheem
- Rahman Md Azizur
journal: Naunyn-Schmiedeberg's archives of pharmacology
year: 2025
month: 9
volume: '398'
issue: '9'
pages: 11421-11461
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 6
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Breast Neoplasms
- Female
- Antineoplastic Agents
- Drug Repositioning
- Drug Carriers
- Animals
- Nanoparticles
- Drug Delivery Systems
- Nanoparticle Drug Delivery System
pub_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms:
- nanoparticle
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: ''
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Nanoparticle-Based Drug Delivery
diseases_annotated:
- Breast cancer
- breast cancer
- cancers
- toxicity
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 5
icite_rcr: 2.500000000995843
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Innovative approaches in breast cancer therapy: repurposing nanocarriers for enhanced outcomes.

## Abstract

Breast cancer is one of the most prevalent cancers globally, affecting over 685,000 women annually. While traditional treatment modalities such as surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy have contributing to improved survival rates; however, they are often plagued by limitations such as systemic toxicity, lack of targeted therapy, development of resistance, and collateral damage to healthy tissues. While targeted therapies and endocrine treatment have provided more personalized approaches, challenges like side effects and limited effectiveness in specific subtypes remain. Nanotechnology offers new avenues for addressing these challenges, particularly through the development of advanced nanocarrier systems. Nanocarrier systems are designed to enhance drug targeting, improve bioavailability, reduce side effects, and combat drug resistance. These advanced delivery systems facilitate controlled release, higher drug concentration at target sites, and the potential for combination therapies, thus improving treatment outcomes. Breast cancer clinical trials assess treatment effectiveness, providing critical insights through their statuses and outcomes. The aim of this study is to explore the potential of nanocarrier systems in overcoming the limitation of traditional therapy, enhancing the effectiveness of drug delivery, and enhancing overall treatment outcomes for breast cancer treatment.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
