---
pmid: '40441935'
doi: 10.1016/j.bulcan.2025.02.029
pmcid: ''
title: '[Leptomeningeal disease in breast cancer: State of the art and future directions].'
authors:
- Larrouquere Louis
- Clement Emilie
- Sunyach Marie Pierre
- De Bernardi Axel
- Cosset Erika
- Bachelot Thomas
journal: Bulletin du cancer
year: 2025
month: null
volume: '112'
issue: 7-8
pages: 838-852
is_oa: true
oa_status: hybrid
oa_url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bulcan.2025.02.029
cited_by_count: 0
mesh_terms:
- Humans
- Breast Neoplasms
- Female
- Prognosis
- Pyridines
- Trastuzumab
- Capecitabine
- Meningeal Carcinomatosis
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Quinazolines
- Oxazoles
pub_types:
- English Abstract
- Journal Article
- Review
mechanisms: []
cancer_types:
- breast
evidence_level: phase2-clinical
genes: []
drugs: []
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Brain Metastases and Treatment
diseases_annotated:
- LMD
- Leptomeningeal disease
- breast cancer
- tumor
- type I LMD
- type II LMD
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 0
icite_rcr: null
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# [Leptomeningeal disease in breast cancer: State of the art and future directions].

## Abstract

Leptomeningeal disease (LMD) from breast cancer is defined by the invasion of the leptomeninges and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) by tumor cells. Historically associated with a very poor prognosis and survival measured in weeks, their management has evolved considerably. Therapeutic advances, such as the introduction of targeted therapies, and a better understanding of the pathophysiology of LMD now enable earlier diagnosis through dedicated MRI sequences and optimized CSF analysis. The EANO-ESMO classification notably distinguishes type I LMD (cytology-positive), which carries a worse prognosis but is more sensitive to intrathecal (IT) treatments, from type II LMD (negative or uncertain cytology), often more responsive to local-regional approaches like radiotherapy. Data from large retrospective cohorts highlight the importance of combination therapies: systemic treatments, IT injections, radiotherapy, as well as early symptomatic and palliative care. This multidisciplinary approach improves median survival, now reaching several months, and can even surpass 10 months in HER2+ cases. Innovative clinical trials, such as ETIC-LM (NCT05800275) - a French phase II study evaluating the combination of IT trastuzumab, oral tucatinib, and oral capecitabine offer encouraging new strategies for patient care. Although the prognosis remains poor, recent advancements suggest a more hopeful future, providing better disease control and improved quality of life for patients with LMD from breast cancer.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (open access).
