---
pmid: '41101699'
doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2025.114337
pmcid: ''
title: Elastin-like peptides for efficient and safe delivery of mRNA.
authors:
- Li Fei
- Wang Quan
- Wang Tingting
- Xiong Chen
- Chen Ziling
- Ouyang Hanzhi
- Lou Xiaoding
- Xia Fan
- Wang Shixuan
- Wu Meng
- Dai Jun
journal: 'Journal of controlled release : official journal of the Controlled Release
  Society'
year: 2025
month: 12
volume: '388'
issue: Pt 1
pages: '114337'
is_oa: false
oa_status: closed
oa_url: ''
cited_by_count: 1
mesh_terms:
- Elastin
- RNA, Messenger
- Animals
- Peptides
- Humans
- Transfection
- Mice
- Nanocomposites
- Female
- Mice, Inbred C57BL
- mRNA Vaccines
- Mice, Inbred BALB C
- RAW 264.7 Cells
pub_types:
- Journal Article
mechanisms:
- mRNA-vaccine
cancer_types: []
evidence_level: ''
genes:
- Elastin
- Melan-A
- elastin
drugs:
- DOTAP
- ELP
- K40
- KALA
- MC@V20K40L
- V20K40L.
- peptide
date_added: '2026-03-28'
openalex_topic: Connective tissue disorders research
diseases_annotated:
- cancer
- inflammatory
mutations: []
pubtator_enriched: true
icite_citation_count: 0
icite_rcr: null
icite_percentile: null
icite_is_clinical: false
icite_apt: 0.05
icite_enriched: true
---

# Elastin-like peptides for efficient and safe delivery of mRNA.

## Abstract

mRNA vaccines represent a significant advancement in the field of cancer treatment and prevention. Nevertheless, challenges persist in optimizing mRNA transfection efficiency and mitigating associated side effects. In this study, we have developed a genetically engineered modular elastin-like peptide (ELP), designated V20K40L. The V20 module is hydrophobic, while K40 is hydrophilic and highly positively charged. These modules self-assemble with Melan-A mRNA (M) and CpG (C) to form nanocomposites (MC@V20K40L). Due to the inverse transition cycling effect, MC@V20K40L transitions from a loose to a tight conformation in response to physiological temperature (37 °C), enhancing its stability. The nanocomposites exhibit multiple cellular entry pathways, including endocytosis and macropinocytosis, thereby improving cellular uptake efficiency. Moreover, under the synergistic effect of the KALA peptide (L) and K40, MC@V20K40L efficiently escapes lysosomes and translates more antigens, thereby boosting antigen delivery and immune memory. Compared to DOTAP/mRNA lipoplexes (MC@DOTAP), MC@V20K40L demonstrates a 400 % increase in mRNA transfection efficiency, with a concomitant reduction in inflammatory responses. These genetically engineered ELPs promote efficient delivery of mRNA, increase transfection efficiency, and also mitigate side effects, offering great translational potential for mRNA vaccines.

## Full Text

Full text not downloaded (paywalled).
